Payment Mechanisms and Anti-Poverty Programs:
Evidence from a Mobile Money Cash Transfer Experiment in Niger

Jenny C. Aker, Rachid Boumnijel, Amanda McClelland and Niall Tierney

August 2014
Abstract: Cash transfers have become an increasingly important component of social protection
policies in both developed and developing countries. While such programs are often
implemented electronically in developed countries, in many developing countries with weak
financial infrastructure, such transfers are distributed manually, resulting in significant costs to
program recipients and the public sector alike. The introduction of mobile money systems in
many developing countries offers new opportunities for distributing cash transfers. Using data
from a randomized experiment of a mobile money cash transfer program in Niger, we find
evidence of benefits of this new system: Households receiving mobile transfers had higher diet
diversity and children consumed more meals per day. These results can be partially attributed to
increased time saving, as m-transfer program recipients spent less time traveling to and waiting
for their transfer, as well as increased intra-household bargaining power for women. This
suggests that electronic transfers may address key logistical challenges in implementing cash
transfer programs in developing countries, but that sufficient investment in the payments
infrastructure is needed.
Keywords: Unconditional cash transfers, mobile money, electronic transfers, Africa
JEL codes: O1, H84, I38, O33



Jenny C. Aker, The Fletcher School and Department of Economics, Tufts University, 160 Packard Avenue,
Medford, MA 02155; Jenny.Aker@tufts.edu. Rachid Boumnijel, Care International,
Boumnijel@careinternational.org. Amanda McClelland, International Red Cross, amandamcc1@hotmail.com; Niall
Tierney, Department of Foreign Affairs and Aid, Government of Ireland, niall_tierney@hotmail.com. We thank
Concern Worldwide in Niger for their support in all stages of this project and would especially like to thank
Adamou Hamadou and the data collection team in Niger. We greatly appreciate comments from Randall Akee,
Steven Block, Pascaline Dupas, Frederico Finan, Alain de Janvry, Kelsey Jack, Robert Jensen, Charles Kenny,
Stephan Klasen, Alan Gelb, Jessica Goldberg, Christopher Ksoll, Jake Kendall, Jeremy Magruder, Craig McIntosh,
Pau, Julie Schaffner, Gabrielle Smith, Tavneet Suri, Frank-Borge Wietzke and participants at seminars at the Center
for Global Development, UC-Berkeley, MWIDC, UC-Davis, UC-Santa Cruz, UC-Irvine, University of Southern
California and the University of Gottingen. We are grateful for financial support from the European Commission,
Irish Aid, the Hitachi Center and Tufts University. All errors are our own.

.

Conditional and unconditional cash transfers have become an increasingly common
component of social protection policies in both developed and developing countries (World Bank
2009, DFID 2011). As of 2013, 119 developing countries had some type of cash transfer
program in place (Gentilini et al 2014). In higher and middle-income countries, such programs
are often implemented electronically, either via bank transfers or pre-paid debit cards. Yet in
developing countries with limited financial infrastructure, cash transfer programs often require
physically distributing cash in small denominations to remote rural areas. This can result in
substantial costs for both the implementing agency and program recipients, thereby affecting the
potential effectiveness of cash transfers as compared with other anti-poverty programs and
resulting in hidden costs to program recipients.
The introduction of mobile phone-based money transfer systems (m-transfers, or mobile
money) in many developing countries offers an alternative infrastructure for delivering such
transfers. By transferring money via the mobile phone, mobile money (m-money) could
potentially reduce the costs associated with providing cash transfers. M-transfer systems may
also prove easier for transfer recipients to collect their transfers, provided they have ready access
to m-transfer agents. By bypassing public sector distribution agents and putting money directly
into the accounts of beneficiaries, m-transfer systems could potentially lower leakage associated
with social protection programs (Muralidharan et al 2013). Beyond its cost-saving potential, mtransfer systems may have broader implications for economic development by increasing access
to informal private transfers (Blumenstock, Eagle and Fafchamps 2013, Jack and Suri 2014) or
serving as an alternative savings device (Mas and Mayer 2012, Mbiti and Weil 2011).
This potential “win-win” scenario, in which the public sector could lower the costs of
implementing anti-poverty programs and the poor could receive other benefits, is attractive for
policymakers, donors and implementing agencies alike (Banerjee et al 2013). In 2012, the
“Better than Cash” Alliance was formed, advocating for governmental and non-governmental
organizations to move to digital payments for payroll, government benefits and humanitarian aid,
citing cost savings, transparency and financial inclusion as potential benefits.1 This has been

1

http://betterthancash.org/about/. The “Better than Cash” Alliance seeks to “empower people through electronic
payments.”

1

echoed by a number of other organizations, such as the Gates Foundation, which has made
digital payments a key aspect of its financial inclusion strategy.
What is surprising about the calls for a shift to electronic payments is the scarcity of
rigorous empirical evidence to support these claims. A priori, it is not clear that electronic
transfers will be unambiguously welfare-improving. For example, much of the proposed cost
savings associated with electronic transfers depends upon the existence of a well-functioning
electronic distribution system, such as a mobile agent network that allows recipients to “cash
out”. While over 140 m-money platforms have been deployed in 80 countries worldwide,
adoption has remained surprisingly low in most countries, potentially due to weak agent
infrastructures (GSMA 2013).2 In the absence of this infrastructure, distributing cash transfers
via m-money might actually increase costs for recipients who cannot access m-transfer agents or
use the technology. Furthermore, electronic transfers could increase the likelihood of leakage if
m-transfer agents can more easily extract the transfer from program recipients than public sector
agents.
Using a randomized experiment, we examine the effects of using mobile money in
delivering a public cash transfer program in Niger. In response to a devastating drought, targeted
households in 96 villages received a monthly unconditional cash transfer, with women as the
primary beneficiary. The first delivery channel provided the cash transfer manually, whereby
cash was distributed in individual envelopes (the standard mechanism). The second delivery
channel provided the cash transfer electronically, whereby program recipients received the
transfer via the m-transfer system, as well as a m-money-enabled mobile phone. The third
delivery mechanism was the same as the manual cash mechanism, but households also received a
m-money-enabled mobile phone. As we were unable to collect data from a pure comparison
group, our analysis focuses on the relative costs and benefits of different transfer mechanisms.
Overall, our results provide evidence that the m-transfer system had benefits:
Households in the m-transfer group used their cash transfer to buy more diverse types of goods
and allocated a greater proportion of their transfer to protein and energy-rich foodstuffs. These

2

Outside of Kenya, the most notable mobile money success story, m-money adoption has remained surprisingly low
in other African countries, estimated at less than 10 percent. Yet m-money adoption and agent penetration are even
lower in some of the poorest countries, which arguably could benefit the most from this type of technology.

2

diverse uses of the transfer also resulted in a 10-16 percent improvement in diet diversity,
primarily due to increased consumption of beans and oil, and children consumed 1/3 more of a
meal per day. We do not find evidence that m-transfer households reduced their ownership of
other durable and non-durable goods, suggesting that other household members were not
decreasing their contribution to household goods as a result of the transfer.
These results can be partially explained by the time savings to m-transfer program
recipients in obtaining the transfer, as well as increased bargaining power for women. Mtransfer program recipients traveled shorter distances and waited for shorter periods of time to
obtain their transfer as compared with their manual cash counterparts. 3 While the magnitude of
average time savings was relatively small – approximately two days over a five-month period –
we believe that this is a conservative lower bound on actual time savings. In addition, this
savings occurred during a period of year when opportunity costs were high, implying that the
time savings could have enabled m-transfer program recipients to engage in other productive
activities or invest more time in child care. While we do not have data on the latter channel, the
empirical evidence appears to support the former claim: M-transfer households were more likely
to cultivate marginal cash crops that are primarily grown by women.4
In addition to the cost savings, we provide additional evidence that the m-transfer
mechanism affected intra-household decision-making. Program recipients, all of whom were
women, reported that the m-transfer was less observable to other household members, thereby
allowing them to temporarily conceal the arrival of the transfer. We find that m-transfer program
recipients were more likely to obtain the transfer on their own, travel to weekly markets and be
involved in selling household grains than their manual cash counterparts. The results, taken
together, suggest that the m-transfer technology might have shifted women’s bargaining power
within the household.

3

This result would not be surprising in a context such as Kenya, with over 50,000 mobile money agents,
approximately 10 percent of the total number of agents in sub-Saharan Africa. In West Africa, there are fewer than
45 mobile money agents per 1,000 people in countries such as Senegal and Ivory Coast, two countries with the most
well-developed m-money platforms. This is less than the number of Western Union or MoneyGram points of sale in
such countries, which are in direct competition with mobile money.
4Unlike Muralidharan et al 2013, we do not find evidence that the m-transfer mechanism had any impacts on
leakage, defined as the difference in the amount of the cash transfer reportedly paid by the public sector and
received by program recipients.

3

A key issue with the introduction of technological infrastructure platforms is whether
such platforms are cost effective. Comparing the electronic (m-money) and manual cash transfer
mechanisms, the initial costs of the m-transfer delivery system were higher, primarily due to the
costs of mobile phones. However, the variable costs per program recipient were 20 percent
lower for the m-transfer as compared with the manual cash transfer mechanism. Furthermore,
the additional time savings to m-transfer program recipients were equivalent to, or larger than,
the additional costs of the program.
Our paper makes two substantive contributions. First, while there has been substantial
literature on the costs of transfer programs (Caldes, Coady and Maluccio 2004, Handa and Davis
2006), there is scant literature on the relative benefits and costs of electronic versus manual
transfers. More recently, Muralidharan et al (2013) have found that electronic transfers
combined with biometric identification resulted in significant cost reductions for beneficiaries,
whereas Blumenstock, Callen, and Ghani (2013) found that mobile salary payments significantly
reduced firms’ costs in areas where adequate mobile network and agent coverage existed.
Second, our experiment adds to a strand of literature on the impact of m-transfer systems on
household welfare (Jack and Suri 2014, Blumenstock, Eagle and Fafchamps 2013). That
literature has primarily focused on the use of m-money for private transfers. Yet both of these
strands of literature are unable to disentangle the impact of the technology from the transfer
mechanism. In contrast, our experiment exogenously varies access to both the mobile phone
handset and the m-transfer technology, thereby allowing us identify different behavioral
responses to each. In addition, we are able to measure both the costs and benefits to program
recipients.
Combined with these studies, our results suggest that the use of technology for antipoverty programs can help to address key logistical challenges in implementing such programs.
In our context, the m-transfer intervention also improved program performance: It greatly
reduced program recipients’ costs and generated important benefits as compared with the manual
cash transfer. Yet this system requires the existence of a robust agent infrastructure, which is
only available in a handful of developing countries, and often not in the poorest countries where
such systems could arguably have the greatest impact in reducing transaction costs. In addition,

4

it is not clear that such systems will improve households’ financial inclusion or generate longerterm benefits, as its proponents suggest.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section I describes the context and the
experimental design. Section II describes the different datasets and estimation strategy. We
discuss the results in Section III before discussing mechanisms (Section IV) and alternative
explanations (Section V). Section VI presents the costs to the public sector and Section VII
concludes.

I.

Setting and Research Design
Niger, a landlocked country located in West Africa, is one of the poorest countries in the

world. With a per capita GNP of US$360 and an estimated 85 percent of the population living
on less than US$2 per day, Niger is one of the lowest-ranked countries on the United Nations’
Human Development Index (UNDP 2011). Rainfall ranges from 200 millimeters (mm) per year
in the northern regions to 800 mm in the south and is subject to high intra- and inter-annual
variability (Nicholson, Some and Kone, 2000). For example, Niger experienced six droughts
between 1980 and 2005 (Government of Niger 2007). In 2009/2010, the time period of this
study, Niger experienced both drought and harvest failures, with 2.7 million people classified as
vulnerable to extreme food insecurity (FEWS NET 2010).
The first m-transfer system in Niger was introduced in January 2010. Known as “Zap”,
the product was developed by the primary mobile phone service provider (Zain, now Bhartia
Airtel). Like most m-transfer systems, Zap allowed users to store value in an account accessible
by the handset, convert cash in and out of the account and make transfers by using a set of text
messages, menu commands, and personal identification numbers (PINs) (Aker and Mbiti 2010).
While mobile phone coverage has grown substantially in Niger over the past decade, initial
coverage, usage and growth of Zap was limited and geographically focused in the capital city
(Niamey) and regional capitals. The cost of making a $USD45 transfer using Zap cost USD$3
during this period.5

A. Cash Transfer Delivery Mechanisms
5

In 2010, it cost $1.50 to make a transfer between $20-$40, whereas a transfer greater than $USD 40 cost $3.

5

In response to the 2009/2010 drought and food crisis in Niger, an international nongovernmental organization, Concern Worldwide, designed a short-term social protection
program. The program sought to prevent increases in malnutrition and asset depletion by
providing unconditional cash transfers to approximately 10,000 drought-affected households
during the “hungry season”, the five-month period before the harvest.
The first experimental treatment was the manual cash intervention (Cash), whereby
households received an unconditional cash transfer of 22,000 CFA per month (approximately
$US45) over a five-month period.6 The total value of the transfer was slightly less than 2/3 of
the total annual GDP per capita, larger than cash transfer programs in Latin America and subSaharan Africa (Handa and Davis 2006, Garcia and Moore 2012).7 Payments were made on a
monthly basis, with cash counted into individual envelopes and transported via armored vehicles
to distribution centers.8 As is common in these types of programs in Niger, one village was
chosen as a distribution point for a group of villages, although Concern tried to ensure that the
cash distribution points were as close as possible to each village (Niang et al 2012, Hoddinott et
al 2014). Program recipients were informed of the date and location of their cash transfer via a
phone call, primarily by contacting a point person within the village the day before or the
morning of the transfer, and had to travel to their designated location on that given day to receive
the cash transfer. The manual cash transfer system was similar to that of other anti-poverty
programs in Niger in response to the food crisis.
The two additional interventions were variants of the basic intervention, one of which
was aimed at reducing the costs of distributing cash to remote, sparsely-populated and in some
cases insecure rural areas. In the second experimental treatment (Zap), program recipients
received their cash transfer via the mobile phone. On the day of the cash transfer, Zap program
6

The value of the transfer varied monthly, with three transfers of 20,000 CFA ($US 40) and two transfers of 25,000
CFA ($US 50).
7
Conditional cash transfer programs in Latin America range from 8-25 percent of average per capita annual income
(Handa and Davis 2006). The size of unconditional cash transfer programs in sub-Saharan Africa varies
considerably, ranging from US$8 per month in Mali to US$37 and US$42 per month in Kenya and Rwanda,
respectively (Garcia and Moore 2012). These represent between 20-40 percent of per capita income in those
countries. The program was the same magnitude as the government’s current safety net program, which provides
10,000 CFA per month over 12 months, although the timing is concentrated during the hungry season.
8Despite the fact that Niger is one of the largest countries in Africa, the total road network was estimated to be
15,000 km as of 2005, of which only 8 percent were paved. There is less than 1 bank for every 100,000 people,
making it one of the most “unbanked” countries in sub-Saharan Africa (Demirguc-Kunt and Klapper 2012).

6

recipients would receive a message with a special “beep” on their mobile phone, informing them
that the transfer had arrived. After receiving this notification, recipients had to take the mobile
phone to an m-transfer agent located in their village, a nearby village or a nearby market to
obtain their cash. The m-transfer agent would then remove the value of the cash transfer and
“cash out”, paying the value of the cash transfer to the program recipient. As less than 30
percent of households in the region owned mobile phones prior to the program and the mtransfer technology was relatively new to Niger, Concern also provided program recipients with
mobile phones equipped with a m-money account and training on how to use the technology, and
only the female program recipients could cash out.9 In addition, as Zap was introduced into
Niger a few months’ prior to the intervention, there were a limited number of Zap agents in rural
areas. Concern therefore encouraged the mobile phone operator to register m-money agents
within the program area, but did not have any control over the location or density of those
agents. The second intervention thereby differs from the Cash intervention with respect to the
transfer delivery mechanism, as well as the provision of the handset and the m-transfer
technology.
In an effort to disentangle the impact of electronic delivery mechanism from that of the
mobile phone, we also implemented a third experimental treatment (Mobile). The Mobile
intervention mirrored the manual cash intervention, but program recipients also received a
mobile money-enabled mobile phone and training on how to use it.
As these treatments differ in the cash transfer delivery mechanism, as well as the type of
technology provided (m-transfer or a mobile phone handset), comparing outcomes under the
different treatments will allow us to determine whether the m-transfer technology affected costs
and other outcomes. In particular, comparing outcomes between the Mobile and Cash groups
will allow us to measure the additional effect of mobile phone ownership, conditional on the
manual cash transfer program. Comparing outcomes between the Zap and Mobile interventions

9While

the transfer fee and the first withdrawal fee were paid by Concern, program recipients would have had to pay
the “cash out” (withdrawal) fee for any additional withdrawals. This would have cost approximately $US .25 for
each withdrawal.

7

will allow us to detect the additional effect of m-transfer delivery mechanism, conditional on
mobile phone ownership and the cash transfer program. 10
Due to the humanitarian nature of the intervention and the political situation at the time
of the crisis, we were unable to assign villages to or collect data from a comparison group before
the program. Hence, while we can estimate the causal effect of the m-transfer delivery
mechanism as compared with the manual cash transfer mechanism, we cannot estimate the
causal impact of the cash transfer program.

B. Experimental Design
Prior to the intervention, Concern Worldwide identified 116 intervention villages in one
region of Niger. Eligible villages were those classified by the Government of Niger as having
produced less than 50 percent of their consumption needs during the 2009 harvest.11 Of these,
some villages were prioritized for either the Cash or Zap intervention based upon their lack of
mobile phone coverage (Cash) and proximity to the Niger-Mali border (Zap), thereby reducing
our sample size to 96 eligible villages. Among these villages, we first stratified by
administrative division (commune) and then randomly assigned villages to the Cash, Mobile or
Zap interventions. In all, 32 villages were assigned to the Cash group, 32 to the Mobile group
and 32 to the Zap group.12
Prior to program assignment, eligible households within each village were identified by a
village-level vulnerability exercise. Using indicators such as livestock ownership, landholdings
and the number of household members, households were classified into four vulnerability
categories (A, B, C and D), with C and D as the poorest categories. Households from the C and
D vulnerability categories were selected for the program. The number of recipient households
per village ranged from 12 to 90 percent of the village population, covering an average of 45
10Concern

also implemented a seed distribution program in one-third of targeted villages, whereby recipient
households could replace two of their cash transfer payments with the equivalent value in seeds, which was provided
by Concern. There is not a statistically significant difference in the presence of a seed distribution program across
treatments.
11
To calculate a food “deficit”, the Government of Niger estimated village-level millet production and compared this
with estimated consumption “needs”, defined as 190 kg of millet/capita/year. A village that produced less than 50
percent of its estimated consumption needs was considered to be food deficit, and was therefore eligible for
assistance in 2009/2010.
12
The average distance between villages of different treatments was 48 km, with a minimum distance of 3 km.

8

percent of the population. In all treatments, the cash transfer (as well as the mobile phone and
training in the Zap and Mobile treatments) was provided to the woman within the household.13
The study timeline is presented in Figure 1.

C. Why should m-transfers matter?
We expect that the m-transfer delivery mechanism might affect household outcomes
through different channels. First, if the m-transfer mechanism reduces program recipients’ costs
involved in obtaining the transfer or their uncertainty with respect to these costs, then this could
reduce program recipients’ opportunity costs during a time of year when such costs were
relatively higher. Alternatively, if the new technology makes it more difficult for program
recipients to access their cash – either due to the limited number of m-transfer agents, difficulty
in using the technology or charging the phone – this could increase costs for the Zap households
to obtain the cash transfer program. Furthermore, while we might expect such transfers to
reduce leakage (Muralidharan et al 2013), electronic transfers could increase the likelihood of
leakage if m-transfer agents can more easily extract the transfer from program recipients.
Second, the m-transfer system could simply change the way in which households spend
the cash transfer. For example, if Zap program recipients obtain their cash from an agent and
kiosk-owner within the village, program recipients might be exposed to different products (or
prices) at the kiosk. The m-transfer technology could encourage program recipients to store
some of the transfer on their phone, thus increasing the mental costs associated with unplanned
expenditures (Dupas and Robinson 2013). Finally, since the m-transfer mechanism involved a
training on how to use the technology, Zap program recipients could have been better informed
about the program, including the time, date and frequency of the cash transfers, thereby allowing
those households to more efficiently plan their use of the cash transfer.
Third, access to the m-transfer technology could provide households with an alternative
means of receiving money transfers and increase their access to informal private transfers from

13Concern

Worldwide only distributed the cash transfer in the Cash and Mobile treatments to the female program
recipient (after presenting the beneficiary ID card), unless the program recipient was disabled. The requirement was
the same for the Zap treatment group: m-money agents were instructed to only “cash out” to the intended program
recipient, upon presentation of the mobile phone, PIN number and beneficiary ID card.

9

their social network, thereby helping households to better cope with risks and shocks
(Blumenstock, Eagle and Fafchamps 2013, Jack and Suri 2014).
Fourth, since m-transfers reduce the observability of the amount and timing of the cash
transfer, this could affect inter-household sharing, thereby leaving more income available for the
household (Jakiela and Ozier 2012). Changing the observability of the transfer could, in turn,
affect women’s bargaining power within the household, thus changing the intra-household
allocation of resources (Duflo and Udry 2004, Doepke and Tertilt 2014, Ashraf et al 2014).14
Finally, access to the mobile phone technology could have reduced households’
communication costs with members of their social network. This could have increased
households’ access to information, thereby allowing them to improve their decision-making with
respect to agriculture, migration and consumption. Since female program recipients in the Zap
and Mobile treatments received mobile phones, in theory, this should not be a potential
mechanism. However, this might be a potential channel if households in the Zap group used
their handsets in different ways, or if women had greater control of the phone.

II.

Data and Estimation Strategy

A. Data
This paper uses four primary datasets. The first dataset is a household survey of 1,152
program recipients in 96 intervention villages across three rounds. The primary respondent for
the household surveys were program recipients (for participating households). The baseline
survey was conducted in May 2010, with follow-up surveys in December 2010 and May 2011.
The research team located over 94 percent of households for the follow-up surveys. Attrition
was not differential across the experimental arms either in December 2010 or May 2011 (Table
A1). The main sample in this paper therefore consists of those households who were located

14Ashraf

et al (2014) provide a voucher for concealable contraceptives either to women alone or jointly with their
husbands, and find that women who were privately provided a voucher were more likely to use the contraceptives
and have fewer births.

10

during the follow-up surveys and had basic covariate data: 1,081 households.15 Sample attrition
is discussed below.
The household survey included modules on household demographics, food security
agricultural production and sales, mobile phone usage, asset ownership and shocks. For the
follow-up surveys, we also included modules on the uses of the cash transfer. As the surveys
were conducted during a humanitarian crisis and over a short time frame, we were mindful of the
time burden on respondents. As a result, the household surveys did not include a full income and
expenditure module, so we are unable to measure the impact of the program on total household
expenditures. Rather, we collected data on proxies for well-being, such as asset accumulation
(as a wealth proxy) and food security (including a 24-hour recall for diet diversity).16
The second dataset is a village-level survey, collected during the same periods of the
household-level surveys. The village surveys collected information from a focus group of male
and female village residents on topics such as mobile phone coverage, access to markets and the
number of Zap agents.
The third dataset includes is weekly price information for six products in forty-five
markets between May 2010 and January 2011, as well as the date of each cash transfer in each
village. We use these data to test for differential effects of the cash transfer delivery mechanism
(Zap or Cash) on local market prices and supply.
The final dataset is anthropometric data among children under five collected in May
2011. These data were collected from program recipient households from a randomly chosen
subset of intervention villages, for a total sample of 30 villages and 691 households.

B. Pre-Program Balance of Program Recipients
Table 1 suggests that the randomization was successful in creating comparable groups
along observable dimensions. Differences in pre-program household characteristics are small
and generally insignificant. Average household size was nine, and a majority of respondents
15

For those regressions that focus on the specific uses of the transfer (e.g., Tables 4, 6 and 9), 1,052 households
received the transfer (out of 1,081). The regressions in these tables are conditional on the household having
received the transfer, but results are robust to imputing zero values for households that did not receive the transfer.
16
The household diet diversity index is a standard index developed by the Food and Nutrition Technical Assistance
(FANTA) for surveys in developing countries. It includes a list of twelve food categories, including cereals, tubers,
legumes, milk, fish, meat, oils, condiments, fruits, vegetables and sugar. FANTA 2006.

11

were members of the Hausa ethnic group. Average household education was .58 years, and 72
percent of households were in monogamous marriages. Less than thirty percent of households
owned a mobile phone prior to the start of the program, yet 63 percent of respondents had used a
mobile phone in the few months prior to the baseline. Overall, Zap program recipients were
older and more likely to be from the Fulani or Touareg ethnic groups as compared with the
Mobile group (Panel A). The presence of a seed program in the village was also balanced,
although the estimates are less precise. Overall we made 100 comparisons and found 13
variables that were statistically significant at the 10 percent level, 9 that were statistically
significant at the 5 percent level and 1 at the 1 percent level. As we would expect ethnicity and
the seed distribution intervention to play an important role in household consumption, we control
for these variables in the regression specifications.
Table 2 provides further evidence of the comparability of the different interventions for
key outcomes. Household diet diversity was 3 (out of 12 food categories), and households
reported having sufficient food for 2 out of the past 6 months. Over 90 percent of households
relied upon agriculture as a primary income source and approximately 50 percent had at least one
seasonal migrant in the past year. None of the differences in mean outcomes are statistically
significant at conventional levels.

C. Estimation Strategy
To estimate the impact of different cash transfer delivery mechanisms on a variety of
outcomes, we use a simple reduced form regression specification comparing outcomes in the
immediate post period (December 2010), as well as pooled data from the December 2010 and
May 2011 rounds. This takes the following form:
(1)

Yiv = 0 + 1Zapv + 2Mobilev + X’iv0 +seedv + C + iv

The variable Yiv represents the outcome of interest (costs, uses of the cash transfer, food security
and assets) of individual or household i in village v. Zapv is an indicator variable for whether the
village participated in the m-transfer program, whereas Mobilev is an indicator variable for
whether the village was in the Mobile group. C are geographic fixed effects at the commune
level, the level of stratification. We also include a vector of household baseline covariates that
differed at baseline, X’iv0, such as ethnicity. Finally, we control for the presence of a seed

12

distribution program at the village level.17 The error term consists of iv, which captures
unobserved individual or household characteristics or idiosyncratic shocks. We cluster the error
term at the village level to account for the program design and correct for heteroskedasticity. The
coefficients of interest are 1 and 2, which capture the average impact of the two treatments as
compared to the basic cash intervention. We also test whether these coefficients are equal. Most
regression specifications presented in this paper use the December 2010 household data. When
household data are available for two post periods, as is the case for Table 4, we pool the data and
include a linear time trend variable.18 Nevertheless, we also conduct separate analyses by time
period (December or May), which allows us to measure the immediate and longer-term effects of
the program. In those cases where the December or May results differ from the pooled results,
these are noted in a footnote.19

III.

Results

A. Uses of the Transfer
As the cash transfer was unconditional, program recipients were free to spend the cash
transfer how they wished. Overall, households in the manual cash villages used their transfer to
purchase 4.40 different categories of goods, including staple grains (99%), cowpeas (42%), meat
(40%), oil (70%), condiments (70%), health expenses (28%), seeds (20%), school fees (7%),
debt reimbursement (7.4%) and labor costs (2%). (Respondents could list more than one use of
the cash transfer, so the total can exceed 100%.) Consistent with other studies on cash transfers,
fewer than 1% of households used the cash transfer to buy “temptation goods”, defined in this
context as food from the kiosks (such as doughnuts and cookies) and tea (Evans and Popova
2014). Thus, program recipients primarily used the transfer to ensure immediate consumption
needs, but also to make limited agricultural investments and avoid asset depletion.

17

All results are robust to excluding the variable for presence of a seed distribution program.
For the food security outcomes, we also control for the baseline value of the dependent variable in a value-added
specification. The results are robust to this specification.
19
Additional tables showing the differences between the pooled, December and May data estimations are available
upon request.
18

13

Table 3 shows the different uses of the cash transfer by treatment group, using data only
from the December 2010 round.20 The results paint a picture of more diverse uses of the cash
transfer by Zap households. Households in Zap villages purchased .78 more types of food and
non-food items as compared with the Cash group, and .84 more types of items as compared with
the Mobile group, with a statistically significant difference between each pair. While the
likelihood of purchasing staple grains did not differ by the cash transfer mechanism, program
participants in the Zap group were 18-19 percentage points more likely to purchase non-staple
grains (rice and corn), 9 percentage points more likely to purchase cowpea, and 12-18 percentage
points more likely to purchase meat, condiments and oil as compared with those in the Cash and
Mobile groups (Panel A). With the exception of cowpea, all of these differences are statistically
significant at the 1 percent level.
Table 3 (Panel B) shows the uses of the cash transfer for non-food items, namely school
fees, health expenses and clothing. While relatively fewer households used the transfer for these
purposes, there was no difference between the Zap, Mobile and Cash groups. The patterns are
similar when looking at the percentage of program recipients in the village (Table A2) and only
for the last transfer (Table A3).
While Table 3 shows the extensive margin of the cash transfer, we might be interested in
the intensive margin. Given potential recall error associated with earlier transfer periods, we
only collected data on the amount spent for the last transfer and for specific categories (i.e. those
that were easily able to quantify, such as grains or oils, rather than vegetables, fruits or
condiments). The amount of the last cash transfer was $US 40, about 7 percent higher than the
average price of a 100-kg bag of millet at the time. Table A4 shows the differential effects of the
program on the amounts purchased of specific food items. Ninety-two percent of Cash
households purchased a wholesale bag of millet with the last transfer, leaving approximately
$US 8 to purchase other items. Zap households spent relatively less on the staple grains as

20

A potential concern with this measure is that program recipients could simply list the first (or largest) expenditures
made after receiving the transfer, which could differ by treatment groups. Thus, we might see a treatment effect on
measured expenditures rather than actual expenditures. This concern is alleviated by the way in which the question
was measured; after program recipients cited specific categories, enumerators were instructed to go through a
comprehensive list of all potential categories and ask the recipient if they spent the cash transfer on that particular
category.

14

compared with both the Cash and Mobile groups, but spent more on other grains and oil as
compared with the Mobile and Cash groups, consistent with the findings in Table 3.

B. Food Security and Nutritional Status
While the results in Table 3 suggest that Zap households used the cash transfer
differently, without a full expenditure module, this would not necessarily indicate a net welfare
improvement. Spouses of Zap program recipients’ spouses could have contributed fewer goods
to the household as a result of the cash transfer, potentially leading to consumption distortions.
While we are unable to assess the impact of the program on household expenditures, Table 4
estimates the impact of the different delivery mechanisms on household food security and child
nutritional status.21
Table 4 (Panel A) shows the intent to treat estimates of the effect of different transfer
delivery mechanisms on household food security, using pooled data from the December 2010
and May 2011 rounds. Households in Zap villages had a household diet diversity that was .31
points (10 percent) higher as compared with the Cash villages, with a statistically significant
difference at the 5 percent level. Zap households also consumed .50 more food groups as
compared with the Mobile group (Panel A), an increase of 16 percent. In particular, Zap
households were 6-7 percentage points more likely to consume beans and 9-11 percentage points
more likely to consume fats than Cash and Mobile households. All of these differences are
statistically significant at the 1 or 5 percent levels. Overall, these effects represent a 30-percent
increase in consumption of beans and fats, particularly important food groups given the high
prevalence of protein-energy malnutrition in Niger (DHS 2012). Furthermore, this increased
household diet diversity is correlated with the more diverse purchases observed in Table 3.22

21

Household diet diversity is defined as the number of different foods or food groups consumed over a given
reference period. In this case, the reference period was the past 24 hours. A more varied diet is associated with a
number of improved outcomes in areas such as birthweight (Rao et. al. 2001), child anthropometric status (Allen et.
al., 1991; Hatloy, Hallund, Diarra and Oshaug, 2000; Onyango, Koski and Tucker, 1998) and food expenditures
(Hoddinott and Yohannes 2002). However, improved nutritional status is only positively correlated with household
diet diversity when diet diversity is greater than 3 food groups (Labadarios et al 2011).
22
While Zap households purchased more meat with the cash transfer (Table 3), they did not consume more meat
(Table 4). This could be partially due to the different reference periods for the two tables. Table 3 asked households
how they used the cash transfer (the last transfer in October 2010), whereas Table 4 asked about household
consumption in the past 24 hours (December 2010). While grains, oils and beans are storable, meat is perishable

15

These results are also largely robust to alternative specifications, namely, controlling for baseline
diet diversity measures and using only the December 2010 or May 2011 data, suggesting that the
results persisted in the short- and longer-term.23
Panel B shows the results of the cash transfer delivery mechanism on child health, as
measured by child diet diversity and weight-for-height z-scores (WHZ) for children under 5.
Overall, children in Cash villages ate 3.16 meals per day, whereas children in Zap households ate
an additional 1/3 meal as compared with those in the Mobile and Cash groups. These differences
are statistically significant at the 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively. Turning to nutritional
status, while children in Zap villages had higher average WHZ and a lower prevalence of
malnutrition as compared with those in the Mobile and Cash groups, none of these differences
are statistically significant. This could be partially due to the imprecision of the estimates, as
nutritional status data were only available from a subset of households in May 2011.
While asset accumulation would not have been expected during the program, we test for
impacts on household asset ownership to verify that other household members were not reducing
their contribution to household public or private goods (Panel C). Overall we find that Zap
households owned .16 more asset categories as compared with those in the Cash group, and .31
more assets as compared with those in the Mobile group, although only the latter comparison is
statistically significant at conventional levels. The program did not have an impact upon durable
asset ownership (carts, plows and bikes). However, there was a marginal increase in non-durable
asset ownership: Zap households had .12-.19 more non-durable assets (lamps and flashlights) as
compared with the Mobile or Cash groups, with a statistically significant difference at the 10 and
1 percent levels, respectively. Overall, this suggests that other household members were not
reducing their allocation of these goods to the households. These results are consistent when
using only data from the December or May rounds separately.

unless dried. Thus, we would not expect to see an increase in meat consumption two months’ after the last cash
transfer.
23
The results on diet diversity in Panel A are largely consistent when using only the December 2010 or the May
2011 rounds, suggesting that these results hold in the short and longer-term. For the December 2010 data, the only
difference is that the statistical significance of the household diet diversity indicator (Column 2) drops to the 10
percent level. For the May 2011 data, the only difference is that the statistical significance of bean consumption
(Column 2) drops to the 10 percent level, and there is a statistically significant difference for meat consumption for
both pairwise comparisons.

16

IV.

Potential Mechanisms

One of the core results in this paper is that receiving a cash transfer via mobile money led to
different uses of the transfer and increased household diet diversity. Our experimental design
allows us to conclude that these results are due to the m-transfer mechanism, and not to the
mobile phone. This section presents evidence on the channels through which the observed
impacts occurred.
A. Program Recipients’ Costs of Obtaining the Transfer
A key claim of those supporting the use of electronic transfers is that they will reduce the
costs of implementing the program. Yet whether these cost reductions accrue to program
recipients depend upon the local electronic payments infrastructure, in this case, m- money
agents. While Concern Worldwide tried to distribute the manual cash transfers as close as
possible to program recipients’ villages, a standard (but not exclusive) practice in such programs,
they did not have control over the location of registered m-money agents, which was managed by
the mobile phone operator.
Figure 2 shows the recipients’ travel costs related to obtaining the cash transfer. As both the
Mobile and Cash groups received the cash transfer via the same mechanism, we pool the two
groups. Overall, program participants in Zap villages incurred significantly fewer costs for
obtaining the cash transfer. Whereas Cash and Mobile program recipients travelled an average
of 4.04 km (round-trip) from their home village to obtain the transfer, Zap program recipients
only travelled .9 km to “cash out” at the nearest agent, with a statistically significant difference at
the 1 percent level.24 This is equivalent to a travel time savings of approximately 1 hour for each
cash transfer, or 5 hours over the entire program. However, this analysis excludes the Cash
program recipients’ waiting time during the transfer, which averaged three hours per cash
transfer, as compared with 30 minutes for Zap recipients.25 Including wait time, the average cost
savings to Zap program recipients over the program period would have been approximately 16

24

Hoddinott et al (2014) find that the average travel and wait time for cash transfers in Niger was one hour, using a
portable ATM system.
25
While the average wait time for manual cash transfers was four hours, this ranged from 1 to 8 hours. The
corresponding wait time for Zap recipients was 15 minutes to 1 hour.

17

hours. Based upon an average daily agricultural wage of US $3, this would translate into US $6
over the cash transfer period, equivalent to 20-kg of grain.26
This time savings occurred during the agricultural planting season in Niger, a period when
program recipients’ opportunity costs were relatively higher. This suggests that the time savings
estimates above are, in all likelihood, a lower bound, as most program recipients had to travel
from their fields – often located 1.5 hours from their home village – before obtaining the transfer.
While this distance would have been the same on average for Zap and Cash recipients, since Zap
recipients could cash out at any time, they had greater flexibility in choosing a time to cash out.
In theory, this could have freed up Zap program recipients’ time to engage in more productive
agricultural activities at a particularly busy time of year, or potentially spend a greater portion of
time on childcare, searching for water or food preparation. While we do not have time use data
on child care or food preparation, we do have empirical evidence of the former channel: Zap
program recipients were 17 percentage points more likely to plant okra and vouanzdou than their
manual cash counterparts, with a statistically significance difference at the 1 percent level (Table
A5). While part of this shift in cultivation was observed for the Mobile program recipients as
well, there is a statistically significant difference between the Zap and Mobile program
recipients, suggesting that the shift was not entirely driven by the presence of the mobile phone
handset. There is no observed effect for other staple food and cash crops, namely millet,
sorghum or cowpea, and this did not translate into higher production or sales. As okra and
vouandzou are marginal cash crops grown by women, this suggests that the time savings was
used for more productive agricultural activities.27 As women had to negotiate land with their
spouses to cultivate these crops, this also suggests a potential shift in intra-household bargaining,
which is discussed below.
While the Zap transfer mechanism reduced recipients’ costs of obtaining the transfer, there
might have been differential loss, theft or leakage between the different systems (Muralidharan et
al 2013). Overall, leakage (defined as the amount reported as being disbursed versus received)
was very low: 99% of Cash recipients reported receiving their transfer and received 99,000 CFA

26

A kilogram of millet costs an average of US$ .20 in Niger.
This increase in the likelihood of planting these cash crops did not appear to have an income effect, as the amount
harvested and sold was extremely small, with no statistically significant difference among the different groups.
27

18

($US 200) over 4.6 transfers (Table 5). None of these differences were statistically significant
across the three treatment arms. Part of the difference between the cash transfer balance received
($US 200) as compared with the target ($US 225) can be explained by the seed distribution
program, whereby a cash transfer was replaced with a similar value of seeds. At the same time,
we cannot reject that this difference is, in part, due to some leakage. If this is the case, leakage
would represent approximately 10% of the value of the transfer among Cash households,
whereas leakage in the Zap and Mobile villages (as compared with the Cash villages) ranged
from $US 1.50 to $7.50, less than 4 percent of the total value of the transfer.28
B. Timing and Location of the “Cash Out” and Expenditures
Table 6 provides some insights into program recipients’ receipt of their cash transfer and the
timing and location of their expenditures. Unsurprisingly, almost all of the Cash households
received their transfer on the same day that it was available, as most households did not have a
choice (Panel A). By contrast, Zap households were 66 percentage points less likely to receive
their cash on the same day that it was available, “cashing out” 1-4 days after receiving the
notification. The lag time between being informed of the transfer and actually receiving the
transfer in Zap villages was 1-2 days longer than the lag time in the Cash and Mobile villages,
who were informed the day before (or day of) the cash transfer. Nevertheless, these additional
days provided program recipients with greater flexibility during a particularly busy time.
Zap program recipients also had the option of withdrawing the money in smaller amounts,
thereby allowing them to use the mobile phone as a savings device and avoid unplanned
expenditures. The cash-out data reveals that this was not the case. For all transfers, over 98% of
Zap households withdrew the entire amount of their cash transfer at one time (Personal
Correspondence with Zain 2011). This could, in part, be due to the fact that Zap households
would have had to pay a fee for any additional withdrawals. In fact, less than 5 percent of
households had any value remaining in their mobile phone one month after the last transfer, and
those that did saved less than US $0.15.

28

In an effort to reduce the likelihood of theft during the manual cash distribution, either at the bank, en route or
during the distribution, Concern Worldwide monitored all activities and hired security to guard the cash during its
transport. In fact, those costs represented over 60 percent of the manual cash transfer distribution budget.

19

The slight change in the timing of the withdrawal could have modified the timing of
household expenditures of the transfer (Panel B). Yet over 60 percent of Cash households spent
their transfer all at one time (Table 6, Panel B), without a statistically significant difference in the
timing of purchases between the Zap, Mobile and Cash groups.
Turning to the location of expenditures, forty-three percent of recipients in the Cash villages
spent at least part of their transfer at a kiosk within the village, whereas sixty-one percent spent
at least part of the cash transfer at a market outside of the village. While these percentages were
relatively higher in Zap villages, there is not a statistically significant difference between the
pairs (Table 6, Panel C). Overall, these results suggest that the m-transfer mechanism changed
the lag time between learning of and receiving the cash transfer, but did not affect the timing or
location of the uses of the transfer. 29

C. Using Mobile Money for Private Transfers
By having access to the m-transfer technology, program recipients in Zap villages could have
received more private transfers, thereby augmenting their income and increasing the diversity of
their purchases or diets (Jack and Suri 2014). Table 7 shows the results of regressions for a
variety of indicators related to private money transfers (person-to-person). Zap households were
5-6 percentage points more likely to receive remittances, a relatively large impact that is not very
precisely measured. However, there were no statistically significant differences in frequency or
amount of remittances across treatments. Moreover, households in all villages primarily
received remittances via Western Union (34 percent) or friends (53 percent), with less than 1
percent of households receiving remittances via the m-transfer technology (Panel A). These
results are similar for those households affected by a shock in 2010 or 2011, although the results
are less precise due to the smaller sample size (Table 7, Panel B). These results are perhaps not
surprising, as the agent network was not widespread and the m-transfer system could not be used
for transfers outside of the West African currency zone, the destination of a majority of migrants

29

Finally, the “innovation” of the m-transfer technology could have increased program recipients’ awareness of the
cash transfer program, thereby reducing uncertainty about the cash transfer and allowing households to more
optimally allocate expenses over time. Yet only 28 percent of Cash program participants could correctly cite the
total amount or duration of the cash transfer prior to the program, with no statistically significant difference between
the Zap, Cash and Mobile treatments (Table 6, Panel D).

20

from Niger. This suggests that the results are not explained, at least in the short-term, by the
impact of the m-transfer technology on private transfers.30

D. Inter-Household Sharing
As m-money transfers were more difficult for outsiders to observe, this could have changed
inter-household sharing within villages, thereby affecting income available to the household.
Table 8 shows the impact of the program on sharing of the transfer and goods purchased from
the transfer with different groups within and outside of the village.
Overall, the Zap mechanism did not appear to have a strong effect on inter-household
sharing. Seventeen percent of Cash households shared their cash transfer with another
household, whereas 60 percent of Cash households shared goods purchased from the cash
transfer with another household. Contrary to the prediction, Zap households were 7 percentage
points more likely to share their cash transfer than those in Cash villages, although there was not
a statistically significant difference between the Zap and Mobile treatments or for other sharing
behaviors. These results suggest that the Zap transfer mechanism did not decrease the likelihood
of inter-household sharing, thereby increasing the income available to the household and
changing expenditure patterns.

E. Intra-Household Decision-Making
Unlike the manual cash mechanism, the Zap transfer mechanism made it more difficult for
program recipients’ spouses or family members to observe the arrival of the transfer, at least for
a period of time, as the program recipient was notified of the transfer arrival via a discrete
“beep”. This was particularly relevant for Zap transfer recipients, many of whom wore their
phones around their necks so that they could be notified of the m-transfer at any place or time.31
In theory, this could have allowed Zap program recipients to have private information about the
transfer before other household members, thereby affecting their bargaining power with respect

30

The regressions in Table 7 were estimated conditional on the household having had a migrant, as well as by
imputing a zero value for all households without a migrant. The results are robust to both specifications.
31
While we do not have administrative data on the actual timing of the m-transfers or the time of the day that the
beeps were received, Concern Worldwide transferred the money during the day. These are times when female
program recipients would typically be away from home, searching for water and firewood or working in the field.

21

to how the cash transfer was used.32 In practice, this is what was reported: Zap program
recipients reported that once they received the beep, they did not immediately inform their
spouses, but waited until the evening. As a result, they were able to discuss how to use the
transfer with their spouse in the privacy of their home. By contrast, since Cash and Mobile
program recipients had to travel to obtain their transfer, and often with household members, they
reported that they immediately provided the cash transfer to that family member, with little
opportunity to discuss how the transfer would be used.
Table 9 tests for the impact of the Zap intervention on intra-household decision-making more
formally, using a variety of direct and indirect measures.33 Overall, the transfer was primarily
spent by the program recipient’s husband or son: 52 percent of program recipients in the Cash
villages reported that they were responsible for spending at least part of the cash transfer, with no
statistically significant difference among the three groups (Panel A).34 Almost all recipients (99
percent) stated that they were consulted on how to spend the cash transfer. Yet there was a stark
difference in who was responsible for obtaining the transfer: While only 8 percent of Cash
program recipients travelled without a household member to obtain their transfer, over 47
percent of Zap households did so, with a statistically significant difference between the Zap and
Mobile/Cash treatments.
Panels B and C assesses the impact of the m-transfer on other proxy indicators of intrahousehold decision-making, namely participating in household agricultural activities and
clothing expenditures, the latter of which are common in much of the female empowerment
literature (Deopke and Tertilt 2014, Bobonis 2009, Attanasio and Lechene 2002). As reported in
Table A5, women in Zap villages were more likely to plant okra and vouandzou, both of which
32

Because the program was implemented an area of Niger where socio-cultural norms often do not permit younger,
married women of the Hausa ethnic group to travel to markets (Coles and Mack 1991). As most of the women in our
sample are married and less than 45 years old, we would not expect to find strong effects of the m-transfer
mechanism on women’s visible control over the cash transfer, such as spending it on their own.
33
In order to formally test for differences in intra-household decision-making, we would ideally want to test
outcomes across each of the three interventions between households with male and female program recipients. As
all program recipients were women, we are unable to do this. In addition, a large number of zero expenditures for
males does not allow us to compute the ratio of women to male expenditures.
34
Program recipients who were primarily responsible for spending the cash transfer were female-headed households
(17 percent of the sample) and those of the Fulani and Touareg ethnic groups, for whom the travel restriction was
not a primary constraint. Nevertheless, even in these cases, fewer than 2 percent of these households were solely
responsible for spending all of the cash transfer. We do not have sufficient variation to estimate heterogeneous
results by ethnicity.

22

required negotiating access to land from their spouses. In addition, women in Zap villages were
more likely to travel to weekly markets and be involved in the sale of household grains than
households in the Mobile or Cash villages, suggesting that women were more involved in key
household agricultural activities. Turning to women’s clothing expenditures, we find that Cash
households spent an average of 14000 CFA (US$25) on women’s clothing during this period,
whereas households in Zap villages spent 16-18 percent more on clothing as compared with the
Cash and Mobile treatments, respectively.35
While not conclusive, taken together, the results in Tables A4 and Table 9 suggest that the mtransfer mechanism affected intra-household decision-making.36 Yet there are several possible
mechanisms through which these changes could have affected the uses of the transfer and
household food security: Either male household members in Zap households were less likely to
spend the transfer on temptation goods or more willing to invest extra effort in finding lower
prices for staple foods, thereby freeing up income; or women were able to better hide the transfer
amount from their husbands, allowing them to purchase more diverse foodstuffs on their own; or
women in Zap households were better able to convince their husbands to spend more on higher
quality foods. As we do not have data on temptation good spending, we are unable to rule out
the first hypothesis. The second hypothesis, while likely, is not strongly supported by the data on
the location of expenditures (Table 5, Panel B).37 We posit that the third mechanism is
potentially at work, although we do not have conclusive support of this.

F. Mobile Phone Usage
By having access to the mobile phone handset, Zap households could have had increased
access to price information, thereby affecting their purchasing decisions and diet diversity. While
35

While much of the literature calculates the ratio of male to female clothing expenditures (Lundberg, Pollak and
Wales 1997), very few households spent any money on male clothing during this period, so we concentrate on
women’s clothing expenditures.
36
An additional test of the intra-household bargaining channel would be to measure the impacts of the Zap program
for male and female-headed households. If the program truly changed intra-household bargaining, then the effects
should only be apparent for male-headed households. While we conduct this analysis, we cannot conclude that there
is a statistically significant difference between the two groups. This could be partly due to the limited number of
female-headed households in our sample (less than 15 percent), as well as the fact that the male and female-headed
households differ in observable and unobservable ways.
37We have suggestive evidence that men in Zap households were willing to travel 3 km farther to larger markets,
suggesting that the third mechanism could have taken place.

23

the “mobile phone channel” would, in theory, yield similar results in both the Zap and Mobile
groups, in practice Zap program recipients could have felt a greater sense of “ownership” of (or
control over) the mobile phones, as the transfer was specifically linked to the handsets.
Table 10 shows the impact of the program on mobile phone ownership and usage for each
type of intervention. Unsurprisingly, the Zap program increased mobile phone ownership and
the frequency of mobile phone usage, with a statistically significant difference between the Zap
and Cash villages (for ownership), as well as between the Zap, Mobile and Cash villages (for
usage). While respondents in Zap villages were more likely to make calls or send and receive
beeps as compared to Mobile and Cash villages, there was not a statistically significant
difference in their probability of writing or receiving SMS or transferring money via the mtransfer system (Panel A). Overall, households in Zap villages were more likely to communicate
with friends and family members within Niger, specifically to communicate a shock, but there is
not a statistically significant difference between the Zap and Mobile groups for this latter
variable or other mobile phone uses (Panel B). Taken together, these results suggest that
households in Zap villages used the phone in more active ways as compared to those in the
Mobile and Cash groups. However, these operations were primarily associated with the mtransfer operations – such as beeping or receiving a zap transfer or SMS – rather than for private
uses. Thus, while we cannot entirely rule out that increased use of the mobile phone handset
affected Zap households’ outcomes in some unforeseen ways, it did not lead to increased access
to price information or increased incomes via private transfers, at least in the short-term. 38

V.

Alternative Explanations

There are several potential confounds to the above findings. A first potential confounding
factor could emerge if the registration of Zap agents (who were already village residents or
traders) provided new types of financial or commercial services to households, thereby
improving Zap households’ access to foodstuffs and agricultural inputs. Table 11 (Panel B)
shows that this is not the case. Only 3 percent of Cash villages had a Zap agent, without a

38

The regressions in Table 10 were estimated conditional on the household having had a mobile phone, as well as by
imputing a zero value for all households without a mobile phone. The results are robust to both specifications. Table
A6 shows that knowledge of mobile phone commands did not differ across the three groups.

24

statistically significant difference between the Zap, Mobile and Cash villages. While these
results are not very precisely measured, they suggest that Zap agents were evenly distributed
across different villages, and that differential access to m-transfer agents is not driving the
results.
The presence of mobile phone handset could have enabled households to obtain better
information about labor markets, thereby resulting in differential effects on seasonal migration
(Aker, Ksoll and Clemens 2011). Table A7 shows the effect of the different transfer
mechanisms on seasonal migration. Overall, the probability and intensity of seasonal migration
was higher among Zap and Mobile households as compared to those in the Cash groups.
Nevertheless, there is not a statistically significant difference between the Zap and Mobile
groups, suggesting that the impact is primarily driven by the provision of the mobile phone.
These changes also did not result in increases in the frequency or amount of remittances received
over the time period of the study.
In Figure 2 and Tables 3 and 4 (our primary outcomes of interest), we examined the impact
of the Zap program on 22 different outcomes for three treatment interventions. This raises
concerns that the observed effects cannot be attributed to the Zap intervention, but are rather
simply observed by chance among all of the different outcomes. Following Sankoh et al (1997),
we use a Bonferroni correction that adjusts for the mean correlation among outcomes, focusing
on the key outcomes of interest. Using an alpha of 10 percent, and assuming an inter-variable
correlation of .08 (for transfer uses) to .35 (for household diet diversity), the Bonferroni p-value
(adjusting for correlation) would therefore be between .002 and .005.39 The outcomes that
remain significant at these adjusted levels are program recipients’ cost of obtaining the cash
transfer (Figure 3), the different uses of the cash transfer in Table 3 (with the exception of
cowpea and condiments) and the increased consumption of fats and higher diet diversity (for the
Zap group as compared with the Mobile group) in Table 4.40 Thus, despite using the restrictive
Bonferroni corrections, we are confident that the Zap intervention affected recipients’ costs in
39

The Bonferroni correction without accounting for inter-outcome correlation would yield an adjusted p-value of
.001. However, in the case of correlated outcome variables, the mean correlation between outcome variables can be
included as a parameter in the Bonferroni adjustment (Sankoh et al 1997, Simple Interactive Statistical Analyses). A
mean correlation of zero would yield the full Bonferroni adjustment, whereas a mean correlation of one would mean
no adjustment.
40
All of the results in Table 4, Panel A are robust to the Bonferroni correction when using the May 2011 data only.

25

obtaining the cash transfer, recipients’ use of the transfer, fat consumption and household diet
diversity for one of the pairwise comparisons.41
A final potential confounding factor is the effect of the transfer mechanism on prices. If the
manual cash transfer mechanism put greater inflationary pressure on local markets as compared
with the m-transfer mechanism, this could have reduced the value of the cash transfer in those
villages and decreased the number of goods purchased or consumed. Or, if the m-transfer
increased prices more quickly and producers were price elastic, this could have encouraged
households to consume goods that were less affected by the price increase, or increased
incentives for traders to supply those goods to the market.42 Yet Table A8 shows that different
cash transfer delivery mechanisms did not have differential impacts on the number of
wholesalers and semi-wholesalers on the market, or the number of products available on the
market.
As over 83 percent of program recipients’ purchases in took place in weekly markets,
primarily outside of the village, we collected weekly market price data between May and
December 2010 from over 45 markets in the region. The randomized nature of the program
implies that some markets were linked to both Cash and Zap villages, thereby making it difficult
to differentiate the impact of each and implying that the stable unit treatment value assumption is
almost certainly violated.
We estimate the impact of the cash transfer delivery mechanism on weekly prices by using
the following regression:
(2)

ln(pij,t) = α + β1zapj,t + β2cashj,t + θt + θj + εij,t

where ln(pij,t) is the log price of agricultural good i in market j at week t, zapj,t is an indicator
variable equal to one if a village within a 10 km-radius of the market received a transfer via zap
during week t, 0 otherwise; cashj,t is an indicator variable equal to one if a village within a 10-km
radius of the market received a manual cash transfer during week t, 0 otherwise; θt represents a
full set of time fixed effects, either monthly or weekly, whereas θj are a set of market-level fixed

41

A comparison of the original p-value and Bonferroni-adjusted p-value for Figure 3, Tables 3 and 4 is available
upon request. A less restrictive test than the Bonferroni adjustment would be the use of False Discover Rate (FDR)
techniques (Anderson 2008).
42
For a discussion of the potential impact of m-money on the velocity of money and inflation, see Jack, Suri and
Townsend (2010).

26

effects, which capture market characteristics. We also include a variable for the number of
villages within a certain radius of the market receiving the Cash or Zap transfer at that time. To
partially account for non-stationarity, we estimate equation (2) via first differences. Standard
errors are clustered at the market level. To control for differential price trends across markets
during the period of interest, we also include market-specific time trends.
Table 12 presents the results of these regressions. Overall, the presence of a cash transfer in a
particular market during the week did not have a statistically significant impact upon food prices
(Panel A). The absence of results suggests that local supply on these markets was able to absorb
the potential additional demand from the cash transfer program, especially for staple food crops,
although this is not a causal interpretation. 43
Panel B measures the impact the cash transfer delivery mechanism on weekly food prices.
Overall, the results are consistent with those in Panel A. The presence of the m-transfer or
manual cash transfer program in a nearby village did not have an impact upon staple grain prices,
cowpea or vegetable oil, and there is no statistically significant difference between the two cash
transfer mechanisms. The one difference was for retail rice prices: the presence of a Zap transfer
during a particular week increased rice prices by 3 percent, with a statistically significant
difference between the zap and manual cash transfer mechanisms. This is consistent with the
finding that Zap households were more likely to purchase other cereals.44 Overall, the analysis
suggests that were not strong price effects due to the different transfer mechanisms.

VI.

Was the Mechanism Cost Effective?

A key question for the introduction of a new technological payment infrastructure is the cost
of such programs. Figure 3 shows the per program recipient costs of each transfer mechanism
for Concern Worldwide, including fixed and variable costs, for each month of the program. The
initial investment costs of the program included expenses for identifying program recipients,
purchasing mobile phones and training recipients in how to use them, the latter of which were
43

While the results in Table 12 suggest that markets were able to respond to increased demand, these results only
show relative changes in prices. Welfare could have decreased on these markets due to the cash transfer if the influx
of cash increased prices higher than average prices during this period of year. This requires a comparison of average
prices on these markets during the previous (non-drought) marketing season, which we do not have.
44
Given the price of a bag of millet, households typically purchased small quantities (e.g., 1 kg) of rice. Rice is not
produced in these areas of Niger, so the increase in rice prices could not have increased incentives to produce rice.

27

only for the Zap intervention. Variable costs for the manual cash distributions included transport
and security costs, as well as costs associated with counting the cash into individual envelopes.
Equivalent variable costs for the m-transfer mechanism included the fees associated with making
the transfers and staff time in managing the transfer process.45 While the initial costs of the Zap
program were significantly higher, primarily due to the purchase of mobile phones, the pertransfer costs of the Zap transfer mechanism were approximately 20 percent lower than pertransfer cost of the manual cash distribution. The average per recipient cost was US$16.43 in
Cash and Mobile villages, well within the range of per recipient costs for other cash transfer
programs in sub-Saharan Africa (DFID 2011).46 The average per recipient cost in Zap villages
was US$24.14, or US$7.70 more per recipient. Excluding the cost of the mobile phones, the perrecipient cost of the Zap intervention falls to $6.78 per recipient. These calculations suggest that
the monetary value of the additional time savings for program recipients were equivalent to, or
larger than, the additional cost of the program.47

VII.

Conclusion

Cash transfer programs are an important part of the social protection policies in many
developing countries. While there is significant evidence on the impact of such programs on
improving specific outcomes, there is more limited evidence on their cost-effectiveness as
compared with other types of interventions. Yet understanding the costs of implementing these
programs is particularly important in countries where distributing cash involves significant
logistical, operational and security costs, as is the case in many countries sub-Saharan Africa.
An intervention that provided a cash transfer via the mobile phone strongly reduced the costs
of program recipients in obtaining the cash transfer, and reduced the implementing agency’s
variable implementation costs. This suggests that mobile telephony could be a simple and low45

The key variable costs for the Zap intervention included the transfer cost to the program recipients and program
recipients’ withdrawal fees.
46
The annual per recipient costs of cash transfer programs in sub-Saharan Africa range from US$7 (Malawi) to
US$35 (Ethiopia) (DFID 2011).
47
The cost comparison primarily focuses on the cost to the Concern Worldwide for implementing the program,
rather than the costs to the private sector (such as the cost of maintaining the agent network, which were managed
solely by the mobile phone operator). While this might omit some important costs to the mobile phone operator, this
is fairly standard in cost comparisons; for example, most electronic transfer programs do not compare the costs for
maintaining a banking sector or SmartCards infrastructure after the initial investment.

28

cost way to deliver cash transfers once the necessary infrastructure is in place. Yet beyond the
cost reduction, distributing cash transfers electronically also affected household behavior: Zap
households bought more types of food items and increased their diet diversity, all while retaining
their durable and non-durable assets. These observed differences are primarily due to the mtransfer intervention, and not to the presence of the mobile phone, suggesting that a program that
jointly distributes mobile phones and cash transfers would not yield the same impacts.
While these results are promising, they suggest that electronic transfers may not lead to
improved financial inclusion for all households or in all contexts, as proponents might suggest.
Unlike the mobile money “revolution” in Kenya, mobile money registration and usage has not
grown substantially in other parts of sub-Saharan Africa, including Niger. This suggests that
substantial investment to register clients and agents would be required to establish mobile
payment systems. In addition, while program recipient households in our study used mobile
money to receive their transfer, they did not use it to receive remittances or to save, two
important aspects of financial inclusion. This is potentially related to the limited m-money agent
network in the country, a common issue in other West African countries.
Like many field experiments, the generalizability of our results may be limited. Our
study exploits variation in the transfer mechanism during a food crisis, when the marginal utility
of income can be high. In addition, as we do not have full income and expenditure data, we are
unable to estimate the Engel curves of these households, a relevant question for many cash
transfer programs (Attansio et al 2012). And finally, since Niger is one of the poorest countries
in the world, with low rates of literacy, financial inclusion and mobile money adoption, the
context might be different from other countries where governments are considering electronic
payments. Nonetheless, Niger’s educational, financial and mobile money indicators are not
vastly different from other countries in West Africa, suggesting that our results might be
informative for those contexts (UNESCO 2012, Demirguc-Kunt and Klapper 2012).48
Despite these caveats, the widespread growth of mobile phone coverage and m-transfer
services in developing countries suggests that these constraints could be easily overcome. In

48

For example, countries in the West Africa region have some of the lowest educational indicators in the world, and
fewer than 10 percent of individuals had used mobile money in 2012, ranging from 1-2% in Togo and Ghana to 19%
in Liberia (Demirguc-Kunt and Klapper 2012).

29

addition, the benefits of the program in a context such as Niger -- a country with limited road
infrastructure, low literacy rates and high financial exclusion -- suggests that the approach could
thrive in less marginalized countries and during periods when the marginal utility of income is
lower. This is particularly the case in other areas of West Africa, such as Burkina Faso, Mali,
northern Ghana and Senegal, which have similar education and mobile money indicators.
Nevertheless, transferring these responsibilities to the private sector could potentially increase
the likelihood of corruption or leakage, especially if m-transfer agents exert some type of power
vis-à-vis program recipients. In addition, such programs could potentially crowd out certain
segments of the private sector, especially smaller traders and shopkeepers who are unable
register as agents.

30

References
Aker, Jenny C. 2010. “Information from Markets Near and Far: Mobile Phones and Agricultural
Markets in Niger.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3): 46–59.
Aker, Jenny C., Christopher Ksoll and Travis Lybbert. “Can Mobile Phones Improve
Learning? Evidence from a Field Experiment in Niger.” Forthcoming, American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Aker, Jenny C. and Isaac M. Mbiti. 2010. “Mobile phones and economic development in
Africa.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(3): 207–232.
Ashraf, Nava. 2009. "Spousal Control and Intra-Household Decision Making: An Experimental
Study in the Philippines." American Economic Review 99, no. 4.
Ashraf, Nava, Erica Field, and Jean Lee. 2014. "Household Bargaining and Excess Fertility:
An Experimental Study in Zambia." American Economic Review 104, no. 7 (July 2014).
Attanasio, O., Battistin, E. and Mesnard, A. 2012. “Food and Cash Transfers: Evidence from
Colombia.” The Economic Journal, 122: 92–124.
Atanassova, Antonia, Marianne Bertrand, Sendhil Mullainathan and Paul Niehaus.
“Targeting with Agents.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.
Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh and Berk Ozler. 2011. “Cash or Condition? Evidence from a
Randomized Cash Transfer Program.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster and Cynthia Kinnan. 2013. “The
Miracle of Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.” NBER Working
Paper No. 18950.
Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Marianne Bertrand, Leigh L. Linden, and Francisco Perez-Calle.
2011. "Improving the Design of Conditional Transfer Programs: Evidence from a
Randomized Education Experiment in Colombia." American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 3(2): 167–95.
Barrientos, Armando, Miguel Niño-Zarazúa and Mathilde Maitrot. 2010. Social Assistance
in Developing Countries Database: Version 5.0. DFID and the Brooks World Poverty
Institute, The University of Manchester, United Kingdom.
Blumenstock, Joshua, Nathan Eagle and Marcel Fafchamps. 2013.
“Motives for Mobile-Based Giving: Evidence in the Aftermath of Natural Disasters.”
Unpublished manuscript.
Bobonis, Gustavo J. 2009. “Is the Allocation of Resources within the Household Efficient? New
Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.” Journal of Political Economy. 117 (3): 453–
503.
Caldes, N., Coady, D. and Maluccio, J. 2004. “The Cost of Poverty Alleviation Transfer
Programmes: A Comparative Analysis of Three Programmes in Latin America.” FCND
Discussion Paper N. 174, IFPRI, Washington DC

31

Coles, Catherine and Beverly Mack, eds. 1991. Hausa Women in the 20th Century. Madison,
WI: University of Wisconsin Press
Cunha, Jesse M., Giacomo De Giorgi and Giacomo De Giorgi and Seema Jayachandran.
2013. “The Price Effects of Cash Versus In-Kind Transfers.” Unpublished manuscript.
Dhaliwal, Iqbal, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, Caitlin Tulloch. August 2011.
“Comparative Cost-Effectiveness Analysis to Inform Policy in Developing Countries: A
General Framework with Applications for Education.” Abdul Jameel Poverty Action
Lab.
De Janvry A, Sadoulet E, Pantelis Solomon and Renos Vakis. 2006. “Uninsured Risk and
Asset Protection: Can Conditional Cash Transfer Programs Serve as Safety Nets?” World
Bank Discussion Paper 0604. World Bank Publications: Washington, D.C.
DFID. April 2011. “Cash Transfers Evidence Paper.” Evidence Paper Policy Division.
London, UK.
Doepke, Matthias and Michele Tertilt. 2014. “Does Female Empowerment Promote
Economic Development?” Unpublished manuscript.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Leora Klapper. 2012. “Measuring Financial Inclusion: The Global
Findex Database.” Policy Research Working Paper 6025. Washington, D.C. The World
Bank.
Demographic and Health Surveys. 2012. Enquete Demographique et de Sante et Indicateurs
Multiples du Niger. (EDSN-MICS IV). Rapport Preliminaire. Niamey, Niger and
Calverton, MD: 2012.
Doss, Cheryl. 2006. “The Effects of Intra-household Property Ownership on Expenditure
Patterns in Ghana.” Journal of African Economies 15 (1): 149–180.
Duflo, Esther, and Christopher Udry. 2004. May. “Intra-household Resource Allocation in
Cote d’Ivoire: Social Norms, Separate Accounts and Consumption Choices.” Working
paper 10498, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathon Robinson. 2013. “Why don’t the poor save more? Evidence
from Health Savings Experiments.” American Economic Review. 103(4), pp. 1138-71,
June 2013.
Engle, Patrice L. 1993. “Influences of Mothers’ and Fathers’ Income on Children’s Nutritional
Status in Guatemala.” Social Science Medicine 37 (11): 1303– 1312.
Evans, David K. and Anna Popova. 2014. “Cash Transfers and Temptation Goods: A Review
of Global Evidence.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6886. Washington,
D.C.: The World Bank Group.
Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FEWS NET). 2005. Niger: An evidence base for
understanding the current crisis. Washington DC: FEWS NET.
Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FEWS NET). 2010. Niger Food Security Outlook
2010. Washington DC: FEWS NET.

32

Food and Nutrition Technical Assistance (FANTA. 2006. Household Dietary Diversity Score
(HDDS) for Measurement of Household Food Access: Indicator Guide. AED:
Washington, D.C.
Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan. 2008. “Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effect of
Brazil’s Publicly Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes”, with Claudio Ferraz,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2): 703-745.
Garcia, Marito and Charity M.T. Moore. 2012. The Cash Dividend: The Rise of Cash
Transfer Programs in Sub-Saharan Africa. The World Bank: Washington, D.C. e
Gentilini, Ugo, Maddalena Honorati and Rsulan Yemtsov. 2014. The state of social safety
nets 2014. Washington, DC : The World Bank Group.
Government of Niger. 2007. Plan National de Contingence: Volet Sécurité Alimentaire et
Nutritionnelle. Niamey, Niger.
GSMA. 2013. “State of the Industry: Results from the 2012 Global Mobile Money Adoption
Survey”.
Handa, Sudhanshu and Benjamin Davis. 2006. “The Experience of Conditional Cash
Transfers in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Development Policy Review. 24 (5):
513-536
Hoddinott, John, and Lawrence Haddad. 1995. “Does Female Income Share Influence
Household Expenditures? Evidence From Cote D’Ivoire.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics
and Statistics 57 (1): 77–96.

Hoddinott, John, Susanna Sandstrom and Joanna Upton. 2014. “The Impact of Cash
and Food Transfers: Evidence from a Randomized Intervention in Niger.” IFPRI
Discussion Paper 01341. IFPRI: Washington, D.C.
Hoddinott, John and Yisehac Yohannes. 2002. “Dietary Diversity as a Food Security
Indicator.” FCND Discussion Paper No. 136. IFPRI: Washington, D.C.
Jack, William, Tavneet Suri and Robert Townsend. 2010. “Monetary Theory and Electronic
Money: Reflections on the Kenyan Experience.” Economic Quarterly. Volume 96,
Number 1: 83–122
Jack, William and Tavneet Suri. 2014. “Risk-Sharing and Transaction Costs: Evidence from
Kenya’s Mobile Money Revolution.” American Economic Review. 104(1): 183-223.
Jakiela, Pamela and Owen Ozier. 2012. “Does Africa Need a Rotten Kin Theorem?
Experimental Evidence from Village Economies.” Unpublished manuscript.
Jensen, Robert. 2007. “The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance,
and Welfare in the South Indian Fisheries Sector.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
122(3): 879–924.
Gibson, John, David McKenzie and Steven Stillman. 2011. “The Impacts of International
Migration on Remaining Household Members: Omnibus Results from a Migration
Lottery Program.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 93(4): 1297-1317.

33

Kendall, J., N. Mylenko, and A. Ponce. 2010. Measuring Financial Access around the World.
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5253.
Labadarios, Demetre, Zandile June-Rose Mchiza, Nelia Patricia Steyn, Gerda Gericke,
Eleni Maria Winifred Maunder, Yul Derek Davids and Whadiah Parker. 2011.
“Food Security in South Africa: A Review of National Surveys.” Bulletin of the World
Health Organization. 89:891-89.
Lundberg, Shelly J., Robert A. Pollak, and Terence J. Wales. 1997. “Do Husbands and
Wives Pool Their Resources? Evidence from the United Kingdom Child Benefit.” The
Journal of Human Resources. 32 (3): 463–480.
Mas, Ignacio and Mayer, Colin. “Savings as Forward Payments: Innovations on Mobile
Money Platforms.” March 2012. Working Paper.
Mbiti, Isaac M. and David Weil. 2011. “Mobile Banking: The Impact of M-Pesa in Kenya.”
NBER Working Paper No. w17129.
Morawczynski, Olga and Mark Pickens. 2009. “Poor People Using Mobile Financial Services:
Observations on Customer Usage and Impact from M-PESA.” CGAP: Washington,
D.C.
Muralidharan, Karthik, Paul Niehaus and Sandip Sukhtankar. 2013. “Payment
Infrastructure and the Performance of Public Programs: Evidence from Biometric
Smartcards in India.” Technical Paper, BREAD.
Ousmane Niang, Ousmane, Véronique Mistycki and Soukeynatou Fall. 2012. “The impact
of safety nets on the resilience of vulnerable households in Niger.” 55. Humanitarian
Exchange Magazine.
Nicholson, S.E. , B. Some and B. Kone. 2000. “An Analysis of Recent Rainfall Conditions in
West Africa, Including the Rainy Seasons of the 1997 El Nino and the 1998 La Nina
Years.” Journal of Climate. Vol. 13.
Olken, Benjamin. 2006. “Corruption and the Costs of Redistribution.” Journal of Public
Economics 90 (4-5), pp. 853-870.
Olken, Benjamin. 2007. “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
Indonesia” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 115, issue 2, April 2007, pp. 200-249.
Reinikka, Ritva, and Jakob Svensson. 2004. “Local Capture: Evidence From a Central
Government Transfer Program in Uganda.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 119(2):
678–704.
Sankoh AJ, Huque MF, Dubey SD. “Some comments on frequently used multiple endpoint
adjustments methods in clinical trials. Statistics in Medicine 1997;16:2529-254.”

Thorne-Lyman, Andrew, Natalie Valpiani, Kai Sun, Richard D. Semba, Christine L. Klotz,
Klaus Kraemer, Nasima Akhter, Saskia de Pee, Regina Moench-Pfanner, Mayang
Sari and Martin W. Bloem. 2010. “Household Dietary Diversity and Food
Expenditures Are Closely Linked in Rural Bangladesh, Increasing the Risk of
Malnutrition Due to the Financial Crisis.” Journal of Nutrition, January 2010. 140:
182S-188S .
34

UNDP. 2011. Human Development Report 2011: Sustainability and Equity: A Better Future for
All. UNDP: New York.
UNESCO. 2012. Education for All Global Monitoring Report.
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/leading-the-internationalagenda/efareport/statistics/.
World Bank. 2009. Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future Poverty. World
Bank Publications: Washington, DC.

35

Figure 1. Timeline of Data Collection and Implementation
Year

January

March

April

May

2010

Village
selection

Identification
and selection
of program
recipients

Program
preparation

Baseline
household and
village-level
survey in 96
treatment
villages

June

July

August

September

Hungry season and planting season
Monthly cash transfers in 116 villages

October

November

Harvest period

Price data collected in 45 markets in all communes
2011

Final
household and
village-level
survey in 96
treatment
villages
Nutrition
survey in 30
villages

Hungry season and planting season

36

Harvest period

December
Midterm
household and
village-level
survey in 96
treatment
villages

Figure 2. Program Recipients’ Costs of Obtaining the Cash Transfer by Cash
Transfer Delivery Mechanism
2.3

1.8

1.3

0.8

0.3

-0.2

Manual Cash/Placebo

M-Transfer

Distance (km) to Cashpoint

Distance (hours) to Cash Point

Notes: This figure shows the mean cost (in km and hours), by transfer mechanism, for program recipients’
travel to the nearest cash point to obtain their cash transfer. Data were obtained from the household surveys
and Concern Worldwide’s list of distribution points for the manual cash villages.

37

Figure 3. Per Program Recipient Distribution Costs ($US) by Cash Transfer
Delivery Mechanism

14

Cost (US$) Per Program Recipient

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
May

June

July
M - transfer

Aug

Sept

Manual cash

Notes: This figure shows the per program recipient costs (in $US) for the manual cash and m-transfer
mechanisms for each month of the program. For the m-transfer mechanism, costs include the fixed costs of
purchasing the mobile phones, training program recipients in how to use the mobile phones and the variable
costs associated with the monthly distribution. For the manual cash mechanism, costs include primarily
variable costs associated with manually counting the cash, transport, security and staff time.

38

Table 1: Baseline Individual and Household Covariates (by Program Status)
(1)
(2)
(3)
ZapMobileCash
Cash
Cash

(4)
ZapMobile

Mean
(s.d.)

Respondent is member of Hausa ethnic group
Number of household members
Number of household members over 15
Average years of household education
Panel B: Household Income Sources and Assets
Agriculture is an income source
Livestock is an income source
Remittances are an income source
Number of income source categories
Number of asset categories
Panel C: Mobile Phone Ownership and Usage
Household owns mobile phone
Respondent is owner of mobile phone
Respondent has used mobile phone since last harvest
Used phone to make call since last harvest
Used phone to send or receive m-money transfer

39

1.78
(1.60)
0.05
(0.03)
0.02
(0.04)
-0.06
(0.08)
-0.64
(0.62)
0.07
(0.25)
-0.01
(0.03)

-1.17
(1.46)
0.01
(0.04)
0.00
(0.04)
0.08
(0.07)
-0.40
(0.46)
-0.05
(0.19)
0.04
(0.03)

2.95*
(1.59)
0.04
(0.03)
0.02
(0.04)
-0.14*
(0.08)
-0.24
(0.56)
0.12
(0.24)
-0.05
(0.03)

-0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.05)
-0.03
(0.04)
-0.03
(0.10)
-0.04
(0.17)

-0.01
(0.02)
-0.08
(0.06)
-0.04
(0.04)
-0.19
(0.11)
-0.18
(0.17)

-0.01
(0.02)
0.09
(0.06)
0.01
(0.04)
0.16
(0.10)
0.14
(0.17)

0.29
(0.45)
0.25
(0.43)
0.63
(0.48)
0.29
(0.45)
0.01
(0.00)

Polygamous household

Coeff
(s.e.)

0.97
(0.16)
0.62
(0.48)
0.35
(0.48)
2.46
(1.07)
3.59
(1.56)

Respondent is household head

Coeff
(s.e.)

33.73
(11.12)
0.13
(0.34)
0.28
(0.45)
0.82
(0.39)
9.34
(4.92)
3.53
(2.09)
0.58
(0.31)

Panel A: Socio-Demographic Characteristics
Age of respondent

Coeff
(s.e.)

-0.01
(0.04)
-0.05
(0.07)
-0.02
(0.05)
-0.07*
(0.04)
0.01
(0.01)

-0.06
(0.05)
-0.07
(0.06)
-0.05
(0.05)
-0.06
(0.05)
0.01
(0.01)

0.05
(0.05)
0.00
(0.00)
0.03
(0.05)
-0.01
(0.05)
0.01
(0.01)

Panel D: Shocks
Household experienced drought in past year

0.99
(0.12)
0.82
(0.27)
1150

Number of observations
Panel E: Village-Level Covariates
Market located within the village
Distance to nearest market
Presence of a seed distribution program
Number of observations

0.01
(0.01)
-0.07
(0.05)
1150

-0.01
(0.01)
0.01
(0.05)
1150

0.25
(0.44)
7.60
(6.42)
0.28
(0.45)
96

Household experienced crickets in past year

-0.00
(0.01)
-0.06
(0.05)
1150
-0.04
(0.10)
-0.23
(0.44)
-0.01
(0.07)
96

-0.11
(0.09)
1.14
(7.62)
-0.09
(0.06)
96

0.08
(0.09)
-1.37
(9.84)
0.08
(0.08)
96

Notes: This table presents a comparison of individual and household covariates in each of the different treatment areas.
Column 1 shows the mean and s.d. of the basic treatment (Cash) households, whereas Columns 2 and 3 show the average
difference between the different treatments and the cash households. Column 4 shows the average difference between the
Zap and Mobile treatment households. All regressions control for commune-level fixed effects and the presence of a seed
program in the village. Heteroskedasticity-consistent s.e. are clustered at the village level(for Panels A-C) are presented in
parentheses. *** significant at the 1 percent level, ** significant at the 5 percent level, * significant at the 10 percent level.

40

Table 2: Baseline Individual and Household Outcomes (by Program Status)
(1)
(2)
(3)

(4)

Mean (s.d.)

Zap-Cash
Coeff
(s.e.)

MobileCash
Coeff
(s.e.)

ZapMobile

1.9
(1.56)
3.07
(2.04)
0.46
(0.50)

0.12
(0.16)
-0.10
(0.21)
0.06
(0.09)

0.03
(0.17)
-0.31
(0.19)
0.10
(0.08)

0.08
(0.16)
0.21
(0.21)
-0.04
-0.08

0.49
(0.50)
0.64
(0.80)
2.11
(1.27)
0.05
(0.21)

0.01
(0.06)
0.05
(0.10)
-0.28
-0.17
-0.00
(0.03)

0.01
(0.05)
0.06
(0.08)
-0.18
(0.22)
0.01
(0.03)

-0.01
(0.05)
-0.01
(0.10)
-0.09
(0.22)
-0.02
(0.03)

0.98
(0.13)
0.97
(0.18)
269
(354)
0.87
(0.34)
10.81
(32)
0.04
(0.19)
1150

-0.01
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.01)
4.20
(48.70)
-0.00
(0.04)
2.03
(2.87)
-0.00
(0.02)
1150

-0.00
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
-35.42
(46.00)
-0.02
(0.04)
0.48
(3.19)
0.00
(0.02)
1150

-0.01
(0.01)
-0.02
(0.01)
39.63
(44.66)
0.02
(0.04)
1.55
(3.51)
-0.01
(0.02)
1150

Cash

Panel A: Food Security Outcomes and Coping Strategies
Number of months of household food provisioning (scale of 6)
Household diet diversity index (scale of 12)
Reduced meals
Panel B: Migration and Remittances
One household member migrated since the last harvest
Number of household members who migrated since last harvest
Number of remittances received
Received remittance via m-money transfer (zap)
Panel C: Agricultural Production and Livestock
Cultivate land
Produce millet
Quantity of millet produced (kg)
Produce cowpea
Quantity of cowpea produced (kg)
Sold millet
Number of observations

Coeff
(s.e.)

Notes: This table presents a pre-treatment comparison of individual and household outcomes in each of the different treatment areas.
Column 1 shows the mean and s.d. of the basic treatment (Cash) households, whereas Columns 2 and 3 show the average difference
between the different treatments and the cash households. Column 4 shows the average difference between the Zap and Mobile
treatment households. All regressions control for commune-level fixed effects and the presence of a seed program in the village.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent s.e. clustered at the village level are presented in parentheses. *** significant at the 1 percent level, **
significant at the 5 percent level, * significant at the 10 percent level.

41

Table 3: Uses of the Cash Transfer
(1)
Cash
average
Mean
(s.d.)
Panel A: Uses of Cash Transfer for Food Items
4.46
Number of food and non-food items purchased with cash transfer
(2.45)
Transfer used to buy staple grains (millet, sorghum)
0.99
(0.05)
Transfer used to buy other grains (corn, rice)
0.58
(0.50)
Transfer used to buy cowpea
0.42
(0.49)
Transfer used to buy condiments
0.69
(0.46)
Transfer used to buy oil
0.69
(0.46)
Transfer used to buy meat
0.40
(0.49)
Panel B: Uses of Cash Transfer for Non-Food Items
Transfer used to pay school fees
.07
(0.25)

(2)
Zap-Cash

(3)
MobileCash

(4)
ZapMobile

Coeff(s.e.) Coeff(s.e.) Coeff(s.e.)
0.78***
-0.06
0.84***
(0.24)
(0.25)
(0.25)
-0.01
-0.00
-0.00
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
0.18***
-0.01
0.19***
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.06)
0.09*
-0.01
0.10**
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.05)
0.12**
-0.00
0.12***
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.04)
0.15***
-0.00
0.15***
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.05)
0.16***
-0.02
0.18***
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)

0.00

-0.02

0.03

(0.03)

(0.04)

(0.03)

.04

0.02

0.02

-0.00

(0.19)

(0.01)

(0.02)

(0.02)

1052

Observations

-0.01
(0.02)

(0.45)
Transfer used to buy clothes

-0.01
(0.02)

.29

Transfer used to pay health expenses

-0.01
(0.02)

1052

1052

Notes: This table presents a simple difference comparison of households in each of the different treatment areas. Column 1 shows the
mean and s.d. of the basic treatment (Cash) households, whereas Columns 2 and 3 show the average difference between the different
treatments and the cash households. Column 4 shows the average difference between the Zap and Mobile treatment households. All
regressions control for geographic-level fixed effects and for the presence of a seed distribution program in the village. Heteroskedasticityconsistent s.e. clustered at the village level are presented in parentheses. *** significant at the 1 percent level, ** significant at the 5
percent level, * significant at the 10 percent level.

42

Table 4: Impact on Food Security, Nutritional Status and Asset Ownership
(1)

Fruit
Number of observations
Panel B: Child Nutritional Status
Number of meals eaten by children under 5 in past 24 hours
Weight-for-Height Z-score (WHZ)
Prevalence of wasting (WHZ less than -2 s.d.)

Coeff
(s.e.)

0.31**
(0.16)

-0.19
(0.13)

0.50***
(0.14)

-0.01
(0.01)
0.07**
(0.03)
0.09***
(0.03)
0.02
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.05)
0.02*
(0.01)
2162

-0.01
(0.01)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.03)
-0.00
(0.02)
-0.07*
(0.04)
-0.01
(0.01)
2162

-0.01
(0.01)
0.06**
(0.03)
0.11***
(0.03)
0.03*
(0.01)
0.07*
(0.04)
0.03***
(0.01)
2162

0.30**
(0.13)
0.04
(0.11)
-0.02
(0.03)
691

-0.02
(0.18)
0.02
(0.14)
-0.05
(0.06)
691

0.24*
(0.13)
0.07
(0.14)
0.00
(0.05)
691

3.03
(1.22)
0.16
(0.45)
1.61
(0.88)

Condiments

Coeff
(s.e.)

3.16
(1.72)
-1.10
(0.90)
0.16
(0.37)

Meat

Coeff
(s.e.)

0.99
(0.11)
0.17
(0.38)
0.29
(0.45)
0.06
(0.24)
0.36
(0.48)
0.03
(0.16)

Fats

MobileCash

3.14
(1.69)

Beans

ZapCash

(4)
ZapMobile

Mean
(s.d.)

Consumption of:
Grains

(3)

Cash
average

Panel A: Food Security
Household diet diversity score (out of 12)

(2)

0.16
(0.11)
-0.00
(0.04)
0.12*
(0.07)
2162

-0.15
(0.13)
-0.05*
(0.03)
-0.07
(0.08)
2162

0.31***
(0.09)
0.05
(0.03)
0.19***
(0.07)
2162

Number of observations
Panel C: Durable and Non-Durable Goods
Number of asset categories owned (out of 12)
Durable assets
Non-durable assets
Number of observations

Notes: This table presents the simple difference estimates for each of the different treatment areas. Column 1 shows the mean and s.d. of
the basic treatment (cash) households, whereas Columns 2 and 3 show the difference in means between the different treatments and the
cash households. Column 4 shows the difference in means for zap and Mobile treatments. All regressions control for commune-level
fixed effects and the presence of a seed program in the village. Heteroskedasticity-consistent s.e. clustered at the village level are
presented in parentheses. *** significant at the 1 percent level, ** significant at the 5 percent level, * significant at the 10 percent level.
Panels A and C include pooled data from the December and May rounds, whereas Panel B only includes data from the May round.

43

Table 5: Leakage
(1)

Amount of money received (CFA)
Number of observations

Zap-Cash

MobileCash

0.99
(0.05)
4.60
(1.02)
99,254
(26239)

Number of transfers received

(3)

Cash
average

Program recipient received cash transfer

(2)

-0.00
0.00
(0.01)
(0.00)
-0.16
-0.17
(0.11)
(0.13)
-868.12
-3,651.53
(2,514.04) (2,906.76)

1081

1081

1081

(4)
ZapMobile

-0.01
(0.01)
0.02
(0.12)
2,783.41
(2,579.33)
1081

Notes: This table presents a simple difference comparison of households in each of the different treatment areas. Column 1
shows the mean and s.d. of the basic treatment (Cash) households, whereas Columns 2 and 3 show the average difference
between the different treatments and the cash households. Column 4 shows the average difference between the Zap and
Mobile treatment households. All regressions control for geographic-level fixed effects and for the presence of a seed
distribution program in the village. Heteroskedasticity-consistent s.e. clustered at the village level are presented in
parentheses. *** significant at the 1 percent level, ** significant at the 5 percent level, * significant at the 10 percent level.

44

Table 6: Location, Knowledge and Timing of Cash Transfer Expenses
(1)
(2)
Cash
Zapaverage
Cash
Panel A: Timing of Receipt of Transfer
Obtained transfer the same day
0.89
-0.66***
(0.30)
(0.05)
Value (CFA) saved on mobile phone
102
5.44
(134)
(43.29)
Panel B: Timing of Expenditures
Spent money all at once
0.61
-0.04
(0.49)
(0.04)
Spent money at least two times
0.45
0.03
(0.50)
(0.04)
Spent money more than two times
0.28
0.05
(0.45)
(0.04)
Pane C: Location of Expenditures
Spent transfer at kiosk in village

(3)
MobileCash

(4)
ZapMobile

0.00
(0.02)
-39.13
(43.25)

-0.66***
(0.05)
44.58
(27.15)

-0.04
(0.05)
0.01
(0.05)
0.03
(0.04)

-0.00
(0.04)
0.03
(0.04)
0.02
(0.03)

0.42
(0.49)
0.22
(0.42)
0.62
(0.49)

Spent transfer at market outside village
Panel D: Knowledge of Cash Transfer
Knew correct amount of cash transfer
Knew correct duration of cash transfer
Number of observations

-0.04
(0.05)
0.06
(0.08)
-0.05
(0.08)

0.08
(0.06)
-0.05
(0.08)
0.04
(0.08)

0.28
(0.44)
0.26
(0.44)

Spent transfer at market within village

0.04
(0.06)
0.02
(0.09)
-0.00
(0.09)
-0.00
(0.05)
-0.01
(0.05)
1052

0.00
(0.05)
-0.06
(0.05)
1052

-0.01
(0.06)
0.05
(0.06)
1052

Notes: This table presents the simple difference estimates for each of the different treatment areas. Column 1 shows the mean and s.d.
of the basic treatment (Cash) households, whereas Columns 2 and 3 show the difference in means between the different treatments and
the cash households. Column 4 shows the difference in means for the Zap and Mobile treatments. All regressions control for
commune-level fixed effects and the presence of a seed program in the village. Heteroskedasticity-consistent s.e. clustered at the village
level are presented in parentheses. *** significant at the 1 percent level, ** significant at the 5 percent level, * significant at the 10
percent level.

45

Table 7. Private Transfers
(1)
Cash
average

Received remittance via Western Union
Received remittance via friend
Received remittance via Zap
Transferred credit via Zap
Number of observations
Panel B: Households affected by drought
Received remittances as income
Amount of remittances received for last transfer (CFA)
Number of remittances since last harvest
Received remittance via Western Union
Received remittance via friend
Received remittance via Zap
Transferred credit via Zap
Number of observations

Coeff
(s.e.)

Coeff
(s.e.)

Coeff
(s.e.)

0.06
(0.04)
-537.89
(2516)
0.28
(0.65)
-0.05
(0.07)
0.04
(0.08)
0.00
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
1081

0.00
(0.04)
-1,324.95
(2393)
-0.41
(0.53)
-0.08
(0.05)
0.08
(0.06)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.01
(0.01)
1081

0.05
(0.03)
787.07
(1761)
0.69
(0.45)
0.03
(0.06)
-0.04
(0.07)
0.01
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.01)
1081

0.18
(0.39)
18887.00
(12527)
2.55
(6.48)
0.32
(0.48)
0.61
(0.50)
0.02
(0.16)
0
(0.00)
639

Number of remittances since last harvest

(4)
ZapMobile

0.23
(0.41)
21156
(14618)
2.47
(4.94)
0.38
(0.48)
0.53
(0.50)
0.01
(0.10)
0
(0.00)
1081

Amount of remittances received for last transfer (CFA)

Zap-Cash

(3)
MobileCash

Mean (s.d.)
Panel A: Full Sample
Received remittances as income

(2)

0.07
(0.05)
1,854.68
(2646)
0.38
(1.02)
0.01
(0.09)
0.00
(0.11)
-0.02
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
639

0.05
(0.05)
1,348.90
(2521)
-1.21
(0.79)
-0.01
(0.07)
0.06
(0.09)
-0.01
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
639

0.02
(0.05)
505.78
(2234)
1.59**
(0.66)
0.02
(0.08)
-0.06
(0.09)
-0.00
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.01)
639

Notes: This table presents the simple difference estimates for each of the different treatment areas. Column 1 shows the mean and s.d. of the
basic treatment (Cash) households, whereas Columns 2 and 3 show the difference in means between the different treatments and the cash
households. Column 4 shows the difference in means for the Zap and Mobile treatments. While the overall sample size for the first row of
Panel A is 1,098 households, the other regressions are conditional on the household having received a remittance, and so are therefore
approximately 600 observations. All regressions control for commune-level fixed effects and the presence of a seed program in the village.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent s.e. clustered at the village level are presented in parentheses. *** significant at the 1 percent level, **
significant at the 5 percent level, * significant at the 10 percent level.

46

Table 8: Inter-Household Sharing
(1)
Cash
average

Shared cash transfer
Shared cash transfer with friend or family within village
Shared cash transfer with friend or family outside of village
Shared goods from cash transfer
Number of observations

Mean
(s.d.)
0.17
(0.37)
0.91
(0.31)
0.02
(0.13)
0.60
(0.49)
1052

(2)
ZapCash

(3)
MobileCash

(4)
ZapMobile

Coeff
(s.e.)
0.07*
(0.04)
0.03
(0.05)
-0.03
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.04)
1052

Coeff
(s.e.)
0.03
(0.04)
0.03
(0.06)
0.02
(0.03)
-0.03
(0.04)
1052

Coeff
(s.e.)
0.04
(0.04)
0.00
(0.05)
-0.05
(0.04)
0.02
(0.05)
1052

Notes: This table presents the simple difference estimates for each of the different treatment areas. Column 1 shows the mean and
s.d. of the basic treatment (Cash) households, whereas Columns 2 and 3 show the difference in means between the different
treatments and the cash households. Column 4 shows the difference in means for the Zap and Mobile treatments. All regressions
control for commune-level fixed effects and the presence of a seed program in the village. Heteroskedasticity-consistent s.e.
clustered at the village level are presented in parentheses. *** significant at the 1 percent level, ** significant at the 5 percent
level, * significant at the 10 percent level.

47

Table 9: Women's Empowerment and Intra-Household Decision-Making
(1)
(2)
(3)
Cash
Mobileaverage Zap-Cash
Cash

(4)
ZapMobile

Mean
(s.d.)

Program recipient involved in deciding how transfer
Program recipient travelled without household member to receive money
Number of observations
Panel B. Women's Empowerment
Program recipient visited market in past week
Program recipient involved in selling grains for household
Panel C: Clothing Expenditures for Muslim Festivals
Log(Household Expenditures on Women's Clothing for Muslim
Festivals)
Number of observations

Coeff
(s.e.)

Coeff(s.e.)

0.52
(0.50)
0.99
(0.09)
0.08
(0.28)
1081

-0.01
(0.03)
0.01
(0.01)
0.39***
(0.05)
1081

-0.02
(0.04)
0.01
(0.01)
0.03
(0.03)
1081

0.01
(0.04)
0.00
(0.01)
0.36***
(0.04)
1081

0.18
(0.38)
0.82
(0.38)

Panel A: Decision-Making Regarding Cash Transfer
Program recipient responsible for spending part of cash transfer

Coeff(s.e.)

0.09***
(0.04)
0.09**
(0.04)

-0.01
(0.04)
0.03
(0.04)

0.10***
(0.04)
0.06*
(0.03)

14195
(13878)

0.16*
(0.09)
794

-0.01
(0.09)
794

0.18**
(0.08)
794

Notes: This table presents the simple difference estimates for each of the different treatment areas. Column 1 shows the mean and s.d. of
the basic treatment (Cash) households, whereas Columns 2 and 3 show the difference in means between the different treatments and the
cash households. Column 4 shows the difference in means for the Zap and Mobile treatments. All regressions control for communelevel fixed effects and the presence of a seed program in the village. The data only include observations from male-headed households.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent s.e. clustered at the village level are presented in parentheses. *** significant at the 1 percent level, **
significant at the 5 percent level, * significant at the 10 percent level.

48

Table 10: Mobile Phone Ownership and Usage
(1)
(2)
Cash
Zapaverage
Cash

(3)
MobileCash

(4)
ZapMobile

Mean
(s.d.)

Made calls
Wrote or received SMS
Sent or received a "beep"
Transferred credit via Zap
Received credit via Zap
Number of observations
Panel B: Uses of Mobile Phones
Communicate with family/friends inside Niger
Communicate with commercial contacts inside Niger
Communicate with family/friends outside Niger
Used mobile phone to communicate death/ceremony
Used mobile phone to share general information
Used mobile phone to obtain price information
Used mobile phone to ask for help/support
Number of observations

Coeff
(s.e.)

0.64***
(0.06)
0.32***
(0.05)
0.29***
(0.06)
0.01*
(0.01)
0.15***
(0.03)
0.01
(0.01)
0.97***
(0.01)
1081

0.54***
(0.07)
0.14***
(0.05)
0.21***
(0.06)
0.01
(0.01)
0.06**
(0.03)
0.01
(0.01)
0.01
(0.02)
1081

0.10
(0.07)
0.18***
(0.05)
0.08
(0.05)
0.00
(0.01)
0.08***
(0.03)
-0.00
(0.01)
0.95***
(0.01)
1081

0.39
(0.49)
0.00
(0.00)
0.40
(0.49)
0.14
(0.35)
0.64
(0.48)
0.02
(0.14)
0.14
(0.35)
666

Used mobile phone since last harvest

Coeff
(s.e.)

0.23
(0.42)
0.52
(0.50)
0.26
(0.44)
0.00
(0.00)
0.07
(0.25)
0.00
(0.00)
0.01
(0.12)
1081

Panel A: Mobile Phone Ownership
Program recipient owns a mobile phone

Coeff
(s.e.)

0.22***
(0.06)
0.01
(0.01)
-0.04
(0.06)
0.11***
(0.04)
0.04
(0.04)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.04)
666

0.14***
(0.05)
0.02**
(0.01)
-0.05
(0.06)
0.11***
(0.04)
0.01
(0.04)
0.01
(0.02)
0.03
(0.04)
666

0.08*
(0.05)
-0.01
(0.01)
0.02
(0.04)
0.00
(0.03)
0.03
(0.04)
-0.02
(0.02)
-0.03
(0.03)
666

Notes: This table presents the simple difference estimates for each of the different treatment areas. Column 1 shows the mean and s.d.
of the basic treatment (Cash) households, whereas Columns 2 and 3 show the difference in means between the different treatments and
the cash households. Column 4 shows the difference in means for the Zap and Mobile treatments. All regressions control for
commune-level fixed effects and the presence of a seed program in the village. The total sample is 1052, but most regressions have a
sample size of 666 observations (conditional on whether the respondent or household had used a mobile phone). Heteroskedasticityconsistent s.e. clustered at the village level are presented in parentheses. *** significant at the 1 percent level, ** significant at the 5
percent level, * significant at the 10 percent level.

49

Table 11. Alternative Explanations
(1)

Zap agent in village
Number of Zap agents in village
Number of observations

MobileCash

ZapMobile

Coeff
(s.e.)

Coeff (s.e.)

Coeff
(s.e.)

-0.01
(0.05)
0.02
(0.03)
1081

0.03
(0.05)
-0.01
(0.03)
1081

-0.04
(0.05)
0.03
(0.03)
1081

0.25
(0.44)
7.60
(6.42)
0.03
(0.19)
0.07
(0.37)
96

Distance to nearest market

ZapCash

0.66
(0.47)
0.74
(0.44)
1081

Number of observations
Panel B: Access to Village-Level Infrastructure
Market located within the village

(4)

Mean (s.d.)

Household was affected by illness in 2010/2011

(3)

Cash
average

Panel A: Shocks
Household was affected by drought in 2010/2011

(2)

-0.04
(0.10)
-0.23
(0.44)
-0.03
(0.03)
-0.07
(0.07)
96

-0.11
(0.09)
1.14
(7.62)
0.04
(0.06)
-0.00
(0.08)
96

0.08
(0.09)
-1.37
(9.84)
-0.07
(0.05)

-0.06
(0.04)
96

Notes: This table presents the simple difference estimates for each of the different treatment areas. Column 1 shows the
mean and s.d. of the basic treatment (Cash) households, whereas Columns 2 and 3 show the difference in means between the
different treatments and the cash households. Column 4 shows the difference in means for the Zap and Mobile treatments.
All regressions control for commune-level fixed effects and the presence of a seed program in the village.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent s.e. clustered at the village level are presented in parentheses. *** significant at the 1 percent
level, ** significant at the 5 percent level, * significant at the 10 percent level.

50

Table 12: Impact of Cash Transfers on Agricultural Prices
(1)
Millet (tia)
Dependent variable: Log of prices

(2)
Millet
(100-kg
bag)

(3)

(4)

Sorghum
(tia)

Cowpea
(tia)

(5)
Cowpea
(60-kg
bag)

(6)

(7)

Rice (1
kg)

Rice (50kg)

(8)
Vegetable
Oil (1
liter)

Coeff (s.e.)
Panel A: Impact of Cash Transfer on Prices
Any cash transfer
Panel B: Impact of Cash Transfer Mechanism on Prices
Zap
Cash/Mobile
H0: Zap-Cash/Mobile
P-value of F-statistic
Mean Price (CFA) of Non-Cash Transfer Markets
Number of observations

Coeff (s.e.)

Coeff (s.e.)

Coeff
(s.e.)

Coeff (s.e.)

Coeff
(s.e.)

Coeff
(s.e.)

Coeff (s.e.)

-0.00
(0.01)

0.00
(0.01)

0.01
(0.02)

-0.00
(0.01)

0.02*
(0.01)

0.01
(0.01)

-0.00
(0.01)

-0.01
(0.01)

0.00
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.02)

0.01
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)

0.03
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)

0.00
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)

0.01
(0.01)
0.03*
(0.02)

0.03**
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.01)

0.01
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)

-0.01
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)

0.76
516
476

0.30
20,927
412

0.35
466
370

0.70
794
469

0.16
15923
343

0.03
435
495

0.28
19,376
427

0.29
1033
459

Notes: Each column shows a separate regression. "Any cash transfer" is a binary variable equal to 1 at time t if there was a cash transfer on market i during that week, 0 otherwise. "Zap
transfer" is equal to 1 in week t if there was a zap transfer on market i during that week, 0 otherwise. All regressions control for market-specific time trends and week fixed effects. First
differences are used to control for non-stationarity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent s.e. clustered at the market-level are presented in parentheses. *** significant at the 1 percent level, **
significant at the 5 percent level, * significant at the 10 percent level.

51

