APRIL 2006

A PUBLICATION OF THE AMERICAN PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION SCIENCE DIRECTORATE
VOLUME 20, NUMBER 4,APRIL 2006
http:www.apa.org/science/psa/homepage.html

Convention: Science, Coffee, and
Beignets Await!

J

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive Director’s
Column: Open Access
and Public
Understanding

2

Science Brief: Rethinking Racial Stereotyping,
Prejudice, and
Discrimination

3

Subscribe to PSA!

5

APA Science Directorate
Career Workshop Held
at George Washington
University

6

Announcing the 2006
APF/COGDOP
Graduate Research
Scholarships

6

Grants Available for
Scientific Conferences,
Proposals Invited

oin in the experience of the APA
Convention in New Orleans, August 1013! This year will present opportunities
like no other – in addition to
presentations by distinguished
scientists, great social events, and
unmatched entertainment, Convention
attendees will have the chance to help
rebuild a wounded city.
Featured guests and events include
accomplished actor Anna Deveare
Smith as a featured Opening Session
speaker, comedian Bill Cosby as the
headliner for an APA fundraiser for
New Orleans public schools, and the
famous Preservation Hall Jazz Band for
a Habitat for Humanity fundraiser.

9

PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE AGENDA

Those who attend the Convention may
also wish to take an opportunity to give
to the city with their own muscle power
– APA has arranged to work closely
with Habitat for Humanity to help build
housing for New Orleans residents.
Visit the APA Convention website at
http://www.apa.org/convention06/
outreach.html for more information
about this activity.
APA President Gerald P. Koocher will
present the APA Award for Outstanding
Lifetime Contributions to Psychology
to E. Mavis Hetherington, professor
emeritus of Psychology at the
University of Virginia. Professor
Hetherington, noted for her research on
divorce, single parent households, and

stepfamilies, will be a featured speaker
at the Opening Session.
A variety of excellent plenary sessions
are on tap, including presentations by
Mark Appelbaum, Aaron and Judith
Beck, Michael Davis, James Garbarino,
Donna Mertens, Joy and Howard
Osofsky, Will Shadish, and Sheldon
Solomon, as well as a symposium on
science careers for women. The
Presidential programming track will
feature a special presentation by “Dr.
Phil” McGraw, and symposia on
growing up with diversity, and
mentoring. Please visit the APA
Convention website (www.apa.org/
convention) for registration, hotel, and
related information.
continued on page 8...

APRIL 2006

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR‘S COLUMN
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR‘S COLUMN
STEVEN BRECKLER, Executive Director for Science

Open Access and Public Understanding

O
2

ver the past year, NIH has been
working to establish and grow a
policy on public access. The goal is to
post all of the journal publications that
result from NIH grants, in a form that
makes the full text freely available to
the public. When the policy was first
introduced, contributions to the public
archive were voluntary. Now NIH and
some members of congress want to
make the contributions mandatory – if
your published journal article is
supported in any way by a grant from
NIH, you would be required to deposit
the impact of research while
the full-text article in the National
Library of Medicine’s PubMed Central disseminating it in a timelier manner.
The online archive will increase the
archive.
public’s access to health-related
APA joined with many other non-profit publications at a time when demand for
such information is on a steady rise.”
publishers of scientific journals to
express concerns about the initial NIH
policy. For one thing, NIH has not yet I can’t argue with the goal of enhancing
demonstrated that it can manage such a public understanding of biomedical
research results. It is important, and it
mammoth undertaking. Many of us
needs to happen. I also appreciate that
also have serious reservations about
public demand for such information is
concentrating so much gate-keeping
growing. The problem is that the NIH
authority in the hands of a federal
agency. These agencies already control public access policy will not deliver on
these goals, nor will it satisfy the public
the direction of science through the
demand.
allocation of funding. Under the new
public access policy, it will be far too
Let me give just one example. In the
easy for the government to suppress
latest issue of Psychological Bulletin (Vol.
research results that happen to be
132, No. 2) is a 37-page article by Marta
unpopular or politically unpalatable.
Durantini and colleagues, discussing a
It is an Orwellian nightmare for basic
meta-analysis of 166 HIV-prevention
science.
interventions. The topic is one of
Perhaps the greatest concern, however, tremendous public interest and
importance. The research was funded
is the disingenuous premise on which
by several NIH grants, and the
the public access policy is based. In
Publication No. 05-5775, NIH asserts publication is exactly the sort being
targeted by the NIH public access
the following:
policy. The article is a classic metaanalysis, with tables full of hypotheses
“Ensuring access to the full text of
NIH-funded research publications will and meta-analytic statistics.
improve the public’s understanding and
It is reasonable to ask whether lay
appreciation of biomedical research
members of the public – taxpayers
findings. Enhanced access to
whose hard-earned dollars helped to
information strengthens and expands

support this research – will gain from
their reading of this article any better
understanding of the research results.
Some certainly will, but I suspect that
most will not. For those who do want
access, however, many options are
available – a reprint request to the
author, electronic access through a
library, or purchase (for a nominal fee)
directly from the APA website.
Public access is not really the problem
here, and adding yet another avenue for
public access will not necessarily
enhance public understanding. What
the public demands, I think, is an
explanation of the research results in
terms they will understand – what was
the research about, what was found,
what are the implications, what are the
limitations, and how much closer does
this get us to a cure or prevention?
The public deserves answers to these
questions, they have a right to demand
answers now, and to have those answers
provided in a way they can understand
and appreciate. As I see it, however, the
NIH public access policy will
accomplish none of this. The policy
cannot be justified on this basis.
So what can NIH do? If public
understanding is the goal, NIH can
invest its resources more productively
to make its funded research better
understood. For example, each institute
can hire a science writer whose job is to
describe the results and implications of
research in a form that can be readily
comprehended. NIH can demand of its
funded investigators that they produce
articles written for a lay audience.

...continued on page 9

PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE AGENDA

APRIL 2006

SCIENCE BRIEFS
SCIENCE BRIEFS

Rethinking Racial Stereotyping, Prejudice, and
Discrimination
by Keith Maddox
Keith Maddox received his PhD in 1998 from the University of California, Santa
Barbara. He is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Psychology
at Tufts University. His research examines various aspects of stereotyping,
prejudice, and discrimination, and the mental representation of persons and
groups. This research has been supported by the National Science Foundation and
the Society for the Psychological Study of Social Issues. He currently serves as the
chair of the Diversity Committee for the Society for Personality and Social
Psychology. He is on the Editorial Board of the Journal of Black Psychology, and
a Consulting Editor of Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. He is the
director of the Tufts University Social Cognition laboratory.

R

acial categorization reflects the
process of placing people into
distinct groups based on variation in
phenotypic physical features of the face
and body such as skin color, hair color
and texture, eye shape, nose width, and
lip fullness. Racial stereotyping,
prejudice, and discrimination reflect the
human tendencies to conceptualize and
value certain configurations of
phenotypic features differently, and act
on these thoughts and feelings in our
interactions with members of racial
categories. Many of us, particularly
students of prejudice, can recruit from
memory vivid examples of racial bias
and its consequences. In both overt and
subtle forms, stereotyping, prejudice,
and discrimination exhibited among
individuals belonging to different racial
categories has long been a significant
source of social strife in American
society and abroad. In general,
individuals having physical features
associated with Whites (lighter skin
color, lighter and straighter hair,
rounder eyes, narrower nose, thinner
lips) are advantaged compared to
individuals with features associated
with other racial categories.

PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE AGENDA

Rethinking Racial Bias
Notice that the statement ending the
previous section is subtly, yet
importantly, distinct from the statement
that Whites are advantaged over
individuals from other racial categories.
It reflects another variety of racial bias
that occurs both between and within
racial categories by suggesting that
individuals may possess features
associated with Whites and enjoy
relatively advantaged status over others
without necessarily being categorized as
White. At first glance, this concept may
seem illogical. How can one
conceptualize racial bias, characterized
by between-category distinctions, that
occurs within a racial category? Our
impediment may stem from the wellstudied tendency to perceive
homogeneity in the characteristics of a
target group once categorization has
occurred (Tajfel & Wilkes, 1963). In
fact, there is as much phenotypic (and
genotypic) variability within human
populations associated with racial
categories as there is between those
categories (American Association of
Physical Anthropologists, 1996). Thus,

3

this bias can be conceptualized as
“racial” because it is appears to be
based on the phenotypic characteristics
we use to categorize others as a function
of race.
This within-category variety of racial
bias, while perhaps much less familiar
to many observers, has consequences
paralleling those of “traditional’ racial
bias. A relatively small but growing
literature produced by historical,
sociological, medical, anthropological
and psychological researchers confirms
that racially-motivated biases exist not
only between members of different
racial groups, but also among
individuals who belong to the same
racial group. Most of the focus has been
on perceptions of Black Americans by
Blacks and Whites as a function of a
single feature, skin tone. Early
historical evidence suggests that both
Blacks and Whites exhibited bias based
on skin tone as early as the slavery era
(Drake & Cayton, 1945). White
European facial features in Blacks were

continued on next page...

APRIL 2006

application of stereotypes and prejudice
(Blair, Judd, Sadler, & Jenkins, 2002),
seen as evidence of White ancestry,
and implicit and explicit evaluations
leading to inferences of racial
(Livingston, 2001; Livingston &
superiority (Russell, Wilson, & Hall,
Brewer, 2002). This evidence suggests
1992). In the post-slavery era, lighter
that it would benefit researchers to
skin provided better social, educational,
reconsider the extent to which racial
and economic opportunities (Neal &
phenotypicality may elicit categorical
Wilson, 1989). Sociological evidence
thinking and the conditions under which
corroborates these historical data,
categorical thinking may be
suggesting that these social disparities
accompanied by more nuanced patterns
persist among Black Americans (Keith
of thought and action.
& Herring, 1991). Furthermore,
medical evidence suggests that darker
Racial Phenotypicality Bias
skin tone is associated with negative
health outcomes (Gleiberman, Harburg,
Among psychologists, this general
Frone, Russell, & Cooper, 1995). These
phenomenon has been described using a
disparities are not limited to Blacks in
variety of terms: Afrocentric bias (Blair
the United States. The tendency to
et al., 2002), the bleaching syndrome
make discriminations based on skin
(Hall, 1994), colorism (Okazawa-Rey,
tone emerges among Latinos in the
Robinson, & Ward, 1987), perceptual
United States and Latin America
prejudice (Livingston & Brewer, 2002),
(Murguia & Telles, 1996; Uhlmann,
phenotyping (Codina & Montalvo,
Dasgupta, Elgueta, Greenwald, &
1994), skin color bias (Hall, 1998), skin
Swanson, 2002), in Brazil (Harris,
tone bias (Maddox & Gray, 2002), and
Consorte, Lang, & Byrne, 1993),
subgroup prejudice (Uhlmann et al.,
Canada (Sahay & Piran, 1997), India
2002). Each of these terms reflects
(Beteille, 1967), Israel (Munitz, Priel, &
differential attitudes, beliefs, and
Henik, 1985), Jamaica (Tidrick, 1973),
treatment of individuals based on
Japan (Goldberg, 1973; Wagatsuma,
variation in phenotypic characteristics
1967), Northern Africa (Brown, 1967),
of the face traditionally associated with
and South Africa (Legum, 1967).
membership in particular racial
Evidence suggests that, in each of these
categories. In previous work, I have
societies, lighter skin is generally
offered a rudimentary model of racial
valued over darker skin, and a person’s
phenotypicality bias, a term that corrals
skin tone has broad implications for his
the various terms offered by researchers
or her relative social status.
(Maddox, 2004). The model is guided
by evidence of our implicit and explicit
These outcomes are, in part, due to
sensitivity to variation in racial
interpersonal processes that were not
phenotypic appearance among members
generally recognized in social
of the same racial category. The model
psychological theory. Dominant
incorporates suggested revisions to
theories in social psychology have
traditional models of person perception
emphasized the role of racial categories.
(Blair et al., 2002; Maddox & Gray,
Few considered phenotypic variation
2002; Zebrowitz, 1996). Processing
within a racial category as a meaningful
begins with identification of a person’s
factor in representations, judgments,
physical attributes that act as cues to
and treatment of others (Maddox,
salient category dimensions such as age,
2004). These mainstream perspectives
sex, and race. At this stage, the nature
assert that, regardless of phenotypic
of feature processing diverges into two
appearance, an individual is potentially
routes of information processing that
subject to the stereotypes and prejudices
operate simultaneously and largely
associated with the group to which he is
independently.
categorized (Secord, 1958). More
recent social psychological evidence has
The category-based route. The first is a
linked within-race variation in
category-based route as proposed by
phenotypic appearance of Blacks to
Maddox & Gray (2002) based on
categorization and stereotype content
traditional approaches to social
(Maddox & Gray, 2002), the
continued from previous page...

4

representation and judgment (Brewer,
1988; Fiske & Neuberg, 1990).
Through this route, processing of the
target’s phenotypic features results in
racial categorization, based on a single,
salient feature (e.g., skin tone) or a
global assessment of multiple features
(Blair et al., 2002; Livingston &
Brewer, 2002). At this point, the
individual may be placed into a relevant
subcategory as a function of racial
phenotypicality (e.g., light-skinned or
dark-skinned) depending on the
perceiver’s conceptual framework. Only
salient subcategory representations may
guide the process of categorization.
Subcategory use is more or less likely
depending on person characteristics or
contextual cues present in the judgment
context (Maddox & Chase, 2004). In
that study, the use of skin tone-based
subcategories of Blacks was augmented
through a manipulation that made
salient learned distinctions between
light- and dark-skinned Blacks. Once fit
between the target and (sub) category
membership is established, associated
stereotypes or prejudices (Maddox &
Gray, 2002) may be used in
interpersonal judgments.
The feature-based route. The second route
is feature-based; influencing social
perception apart from the traditional
range of category-based processing.
This route employs direct associations
between phenotypic features and
stereotypic traits (Blair et al., 2002) or
prejudices (Livingston & Brewer, 2002).
These associations may be learned over
time, or reflect innate knowledge of
social information that may be
overgeneralized to other individuals
with similar features (Zebrowitz, 1996).
An important aspect of this route is that
phenotype continues to influence target
judgments in situations even when
racial categorization overrides withinrace variation through the categorybased route (Blair et al., 2002).
Furthermore the information that
features convey will be applied
regardless of the target’s racial category
membership (Blair et al., 2002; Secord,

continued on next page...

PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE AGENDA

APRIL 2006
...continued from previous page

1958; Zebrowitz, 1996) and is less
subject to conscious control (Blair,
Chapleau, & Judd, 2005).
The role of conceptual knowledge. The
model also recognizes varieties of
conceptual knowledge that may guide
the processing of target attributes
through both the category-based route
and the feature-based route.Possibilities
include metaphorical associations with
various colors (Secord, 1958), early
childhood experiences with light and
dark (Williams, Boswell, & Best, 1975),
essentialist beliefs (Haslam, Rothschild,
& Ernst, 2002), implicit causal theories
(Medin & Ortony, 1989), cultural
standards of physical attractiveness
(Breland, 1998), and beliefs about the
relationship between physical features
and personality (Livingston, 2001).
Each of these and others may contribute
to category-based and/or feature-based
judgments.

categories and their apparent correlates
arise as a function of social construction
processes (American Anthropological
Association, 1998; American
Association of Physical
Anthropologists, 1996).

prejudice in the future, it is vitally
important that researchers give greater
consideration to the role of racial
phenotype and conceptual knowledge in
social judgment.

References
The confluence of these factors suggests
that more and more people in the
American Anthropological Association.
country will not fit into traditional
(1998). American
models of racial stereotyping and
Anthropological Association
prejudice, augmented by the
Statement on “Race”. Retrieved
deterioration of the traditional
7/18/02, 2002, http://
framework surrounding race. These
www.aaanet.org/stmts/
factors may lead to decreased reliance
racepp.htm
on race in social perception and
continued on page 7...
judgment and, perhaps, increased
reliance on racial phenotype. If we are
to recognize the face of stereotyping and

Why Rethink Racial Bias?
This re-conceptualization does not
maintain that the study of categorical
thinking in the domain of race is
obsolete. At times, racial categorization
may very well override the significance
of within-category variability.
However, there are a number of
developing factors in our society that
will increase the significance of racial
phenotypicality (Maddox & Dukes,
2006). First is the growing phenotypic
diversity among the population
attributed to increasing numbers of
immigrants of color (Massey, 2002) as
well as increasing rates of interracial
marriages (Steven & Tyler, 2002) and
multiracial births (U.S. Bureau of the
Census, 1992). Second is the recent
debate over the inclusion of a
multiracial category option in the U.S.
Census, highlighting the growing
recognition that people who may appear
to belong to a particular racial category
may identify with multiple categories
(Steven & Tyler, 2002). Finally,
consider the continuing debate
surrounding the idea that race is a
biological certainty. A growing body of
evidence indicates that the biological
nature of race is a myth. In fact, racial
PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE AGENDA

Subscribe to PSA Today
Did you receive this newsletter second-hand through an email list or from a
colleague? Here’s your chance to subscribe to the Psychological Science
Agenda and have new issues of this monthly publication delivered
automatically to your inbox! This way your news will always be hot off the
presses.
All program and award announcements that come through the APA Science
Directorate appear in PSA, as well as features such as Science Briefs, Science
Policy news, and the Executive Director’s Column.
This free monthly publication is delivered to thousands of psychologists,
members of Congress and their staffs, officials in funding agencies, libraries,
and science writers in the media. Join their ranks as a subscriber by sending an
email to psa@apa.org with the subject line “Subscribe to PSA.”

5

MARCH 2006

APA Science Directorate Career Workshop Held at
George Washington University
by Deborah McCall

T
6

On April 4, 2006, approximately
35 students from the DC
metropolitan area attended a Career
Workshop sponsored by the Science
Directorate and George Washington
University. Expert panelists with
diverse backgrounds shared their
experiences and personal stories with
students.
The workshop, Entering the Career
Marketplace: A Look at Academic and
Non-academic Careers in Psychology, was
moderated by Visiting Senior Scientist
Clare Porac. Students enthusiastically
discussed such topics as “Preparing for
the Workplace of Your Choice” and
“Finding Your Own Path.” Panelists
advised students to write as much as
possible and get published, get a mentor
(more than one if possible), network
and develop relationships, and take as
many statistical courses as possible.

Expert panelist at the George Washington University Academic Career Workshop share their experiences and personal
stories with students.

As part of its outreach to graduate and
postdoctoral students, the Science
Directorate will host several of these
workshops at various sites throughout
the year. The goal in hosting these
workshops is to prompt scientifically
trained students to start thinking early
about their careers and to encourage
students to vigorously explore the
wealth of opportunities available to

them in the traditional academic setting
as well as the non-traditional, nonacademic setting.
Please contact Deborah McCall if your
university would like to host a
workshop or would like more
information. She can be reached at
dmccall@apa.org.

Announcing the 2006 APF/COGDOP Graduate Research Scholarships
The American Psychological Foundation (APF) and the Council of Graduate Departments of Psychology (COGDOP) are
jointly offering graduate research scholarships. Promising graduate students are invited to apply for one of these awards,
including the $2,000 Clarence J. Rosecrans Scholarship, the $3,000 Ruth G. and Joseph D. Matarazzo Scholarship, and a
number of $1,000 scholarships.
The purpose of the scholarship program is to assist graduate students of psychology with research costs. Scholarships are
given directly to the individual graduate student recipients. Eligible students are those enrolled in an interim master’s
program or doctoral program in a COGDOP member department. Students currently enrolled in terminal master’s
programs are eligible if they intend to enroll in a PhD program immediately following receipts of the master’s degree.
Several fellowships have been reserved for students who, at the time of application, are within the first two years of
graduate study in psychology.
The deadline for applications is June 26, 2006. Visit www.apa.org/science/apf-cogdop.html for complete instructions
and a link to the application.

PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE AGENDA

MARCH 2006
...continued from page 5

American Association of Physical
Anthropologists. (1996).
AAPA Statement on Biological
Aspects of Race. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology,
101, 569-570.
Beteille, A. (1967). Race and descent as
social categories in India.
Daedalus, 96(2), 444-463.
Blair, I. V., Chapleau, K. M., & Judd,
C. M. (2005). The use of
Afrocentric Features as Cues
for Judgment in the Presence of
Diagnostic Information.
European Journal of Social
Psychology, 35(1), 59-68.
Blair, I. V., Judd, C. M., Sadler, M. S.,
& Jenkins, C. (2002). The role
of Afrocentric features in
person perception: Judging by
features and categories. Journal
of Personality & Social
Psychology, 83(1), 5-25.
Breland, A. M. (1998). A model for
differential perceptions of
competence based on skin tone
among African Americans.
Journal of Multicultural
Counseling & Development, 26(4),
294-311.
Brewer, M. B. (1988). A dual-process
model of impression
formation. In T. K. Srull & R.
S. Wyer (Eds.), Advances in
social cognition: a dual process
model of impression formation
(pp. 1-36). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Brown, L. C. (1967). Color in northern
Africa. Daedalus, 96(2), 464482.
Codina, G. E., & Montalvo, F. F.
(1994). Chicano phenotype and
depression. Hispanic Journal of
Behavioral Sciences, 16(3), 296306.
Drake, S. C., & Cayton, H. R. (1945).
Black metropolis. New York:
Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovitch.
Fiske, S. T., & Neuberg, S. L. (1990). A
continuum of impression
formation, from category-based
to individuating processes:
influences of information and
motivation on attention and
interpretation. In M. P. Zanna
PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE AGENDA

(Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology (Vol. 23, pp. 1-74).
San Diego: Academic Press,
Inc.
Gleiberman, L., Harburg, E., Frone,
M. R., Russell, M., & Cooper,
M. L. (1995). Skin colour,
measures of socioeconomic
status, and blood pressure
among Blacks in Erie County,
NY. Annals of Human Biology,
22(1), 69-73.
Goldberg, F. J. (1973). The question on
skin color and its relation to
Japan. Psychologia: An
International Journal of
Psychology in the Orient, 16(3),
132-146.
Hall, R. E. (1994). The “bleaching
syndrome”: Implications of
light skin for Hispanic
American assimilation.
Hispanic Journal of Behavioral
Sciences, 16(3), 307-314.
Hall, R. E. (1998). Skin color bias: A
new perspective on an old
social problem. Journal of
Psychology, 132(2), 238-240.
Harris, M., Consorte, J. G., Lang, J., &
Byrne, B. (1993). Who are the
Whites? Imposed census
categories and the racial
demography of Brazil. Social
Forces, 72(2), 451-462.
Haslam, N., Rothschild, L., & Ernst, D.
(2002). Are essentialist beliefs
associated with prejudice?
British Journal of Social
Psychology, 41(1), 87-100.
Keith, V. M., & Herring, C. (1991).
Skin tone and stratification in
the Black community. American
Journal of Sociology, 97(3), 760778.
Legum, C. (1967). Color and power in
the South African situation.
Daedalus, 96(2), 483-495.
Livingston, R. W. (2001). What you see
is what you get: Systematic
variability in perceptual-based
social judgment. Personality &
Social Psychology Bulletin, 27(9),
1086-1096.
Livingston, R. W., & Brewer, M. B.
(2002). What are we really
priming? Cue-based versus
category-based processing of
facial stimuli. Journal of

Personality & Social Psychology, 82(1), 518.
Maddox, K. B. (2004). Perspectives on
racial phenotypicality bias.
Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 8, 383-401.
Maddox, K. B., & Chase, S. G. (2004).
Manipulating Category
Salience: Further Evidence for
Skin Tone-Based
Representations of Black
Americans. European Journal of
Social Psychology, 34, 533-546.
Maddox, K. B., & Dukes, K. N. (2006).
Rethinking Racial Stereotyping:
Racial Phenotypicality Bias in the
21st Century.Unpublished
manuscript.
Maddox, K. B., & Gray, S. A. (2002).
Cognitive representations of
Black Americans: Reexploring
the role of skin tone. Personality
& Social Psychology Bulletin,
28(2), 250-259.
Massey, D. (2002). The new
immigratioin and ethnicity in
the United States. In N. A.
Denton & S. E. Tolnay (Eds.),
American diversity: A
demographic challenge for the
twenty-first century (pp. 75-98).
Albany, NY: State University
of New York Press.
Medin, D. L., & Ortony, A. (1989).
Psychological essentialism. In
S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony
(Eds.), Similarity and analogical
reasoning (pp. 179-195).
Munitz, S., Priel, B., & Henik, A.
(1985). Color, skin color
preferences and self color
identification among
Ethiopian- and Israeli-born
children. Israel Social Science
Research, 3(1-2), 74-84.
Murguia, E., & Telles, E. E. (1996).
Phenotype and schooling
among Mexican Americans.
Sociology of Education, 69(4),
276-289.
Neal, A. M., & Wilson, M. L. (1989).
The role of skin color and
features in the Black
community: Implications for
Black women and therapy.
continued on next page...

7

MARCH 2006
continued from previous page...

8

Clinical Psychology Review, 9(3), 323333.
Okazawa-Rey, M., Robinson, T., &
Ward, J. V. (1987). Black
women and the politics of skin
color and hair. Women and
Therapy, 6(1-2), 89-102.
Russell, K. Y., Wilson, M., & Hall, R.
E. (1992). The color complex:
The politics of skin color among
African Americans. New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Sahay, S., & Piran, N. (1997). Skincolor preferences and body
satisfaction among South
Asian-Canadian. Journal of
Social Psychology, 137(2), 161172.
Secord, P. F. (1958). Facial features and
inference processes in
interpersonal perception. In R.
Tagiuri & L. Petrullo (Eds.),
Person perception and
interpersonal pehavior. Stanford,
CA: Stanford, University
Press.
...continued from page 1

Following are just a few of the
exceptional division-sponsored speakers
slated for the Convention: Roy
Baumeister, Sarah Boysen, Dante
Ciccetti, Jennifer Crocker, Joe LeDoux,
Megan Gunnar, Judith Langlois,
Matthew Lieberman, Brenda Major,
Ann Masten, Susan Nolen-Hoeksema,
Michael Scheier, Sonja Suchday, and Ed
Wasserman.

Science Directorate-sponsored
programming
Award Addresses
Distinguished Scientific Contribution
for the Applications of Psychology
Award
John Campbell
Competency, Adaptability, Performance,
Productivity—Scientific Constraints or
Words to Exploit?
Distinguished Scientific
Contributions Awards
Michael Davis
Neural Systems Involved in Fear and
Anxiety

Steven, G., & Tyler, M. (2002). Ethnic
and racial intermarriage in the
United States: Old and new
regimes. In N. A. Denton & S.
E. Tolnay (Eds.), American
diversity: A demographic
challenge for the twenty-first
century (pp. 221-242). Albany,
NY: State University of New
York Press.
Tajfel, H., & Wilkes, A. L. (1963).
Classification and quantitative
judgement. British Journal of
Psychology, 54(2), 101-114.
Tidrick, K. (1973). Skin shade and need
for achievement in a
multiracial society: Jamaica,
Indies. Journal of Social
Psychology, 89(1), 25-33.
Uhlmann, E., Dasgupta, N., Elgueta,
A., Greenwald, A. G., &
Swanson, J. (2002). Subgroup
prejudice based on skin color
among Hispanics in the United
States and Latin America.
Social Cognition, 20(3), 198226.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1992).
Current population reports:
Population projections of the
United States by age, race, and
Hispanic origin: 1992-2050. P25-1092.
Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Wagatsuma, H. (1967). The social
perception of skin color in
Japan. Daedalus, 92(2), 407443.
Williams, J. E., Boswell, D. A., & Best,
D. L. (1975). Evaluative
responses of preschool children
to the colors white and black.
Child Development, 46(2), 501508.
Zebrowitz, L. (1996). Physical
appearance as a basis of
stereotyping. In C. N. Macrae,
C. Stangor & M. Hewstone
(Eds.), Stereotypes and
stereotyping. New York:
Guilford Press.

Marcia Johnson
Reality Monitoring

James Sidanius
The Interactive Nature of Patriarchy and
Arbitrary-set Hierarchy: The Dynamics of
Sexism and Racism from an Evolutionary
and Social Dominance Perspective

Martin E.P. Seligman
Positive Psychology and Positive
Psychotherapy

Neal Miller Lecture
Bruce McEwen
The Neurobiology of Stress: Implications
for Behavioral Medicine

Master Lectures
Ritch Savin-Williams
The New Gay Teenager: Not Invisible, Not
Sick, Not Gay
Judith Singer and John Willett
Improving the Quality of Longitudinal
Research: Current Status and Future
Prospects
Elaine Walker
Adolescent Neurodevelopment and Mental
Health: A Critical Opportunity for
Prevention

John Gabrieli
Regulation of Thoughts, Memories, and
Feelings in the Human Brain

CARE Invited Address
Linking Research with Humans and
Other Animals
Michael Davis
Neural Mechanisms of Extinction:
Relevance to Exposure-based Psychotherapy
CPTA Invited Symposium
The Notion of Measurement Equivalence
Across Diverse Populations: Examining the
Critical Issues, featuring Antonio Puente,
Jeffrey Braden, Thomas Oakland, and
Bruce Bracken
Science Student Council Program
Writing Your First Grant – Sources of
Funding for Graduate School and Beyond

PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE AGENDA

Grants Available for Scientific Conferences, Proposals Invited
The Science Directorate is currently seeking proposals for research conferences in psychology. The purpose of this program is
to promote the exchange of important new contributions and approaches in scientific psychology. Over 90 conference grants
have been awarded to date. The next deadline for applications is June 1, 2006.
Grant money ranging from $500 to $20,000 is available for the scientific conference. Proposals will be considered using such
formats as “add-a-day” conferences ($500-$3,000 available), “stand alone” conferences ($5,000-$20,000 available), and
festschrifts ($5,000-$20,000 available). APA is also open to innovative ways of holding conferences. The conference must be
additionally supported by the host institution with direct funds, in-kind support, or a combination of the two. Please note that a
detailed budget including institutional support is required for application.
Conference proposals must meet the following eligibility requirements:
• One of the primary organizers must be a member of APA.
• Only academic institutions accredited by a regional body may apply. Independent research institutions must provide
evidence of affiliation with an accredited institution. Joint proposals from cooperating institutions are encouraged.
• Conferences may be held only in the United States, its possessions, or Canada.
• APA governance groups, APA Divisions and other related entities are not eligible for funding under this program.
Conference proceedings and presentation materials (including electronic presentations) must be submitted to APA three
months after the date the conference is held. APA will hold the conference proceedings for three years. If a book has not
been published by APA or another publisher within the three-year holding period, APA will place the conference
proceedings in PsycEXTRA.
Seventy-five percent of funds will be distributed to grantees prior to the conferences, and the remaining twenty-five
percent will be released following the conference and after the submission of a final financial report detailing conference
expenditures equal to or exceeding Grantee’s proposed total budget.
Conference review committee members are: Anita Davis, Michael Domjan, Irene Frieze, Kathleen McDermott, Kevin
Murphy, and James W. Pennebaker.
For more information on review criteria, proposal contents, and budget guidelines, please refer to the APA website at http://
www.apa.org/science/confer2.html or contact Deborah McCall, Science Program Manager, at (202) 218-3590 or
dmccall@apa.org.

PROPOSAL DEADLINE: June 1, 2006
Please mail proposals to:
APA Science Directorate
750 First Street, NE
Attn: Scientific Conferences Proposals
Washington, DC 20002-4242
http://www.apa.org/science/confer2.html

continued from page 2...

The publishers of scientific journals can
do more to publicize the content of
their articles, and can invite
commentary to explain the context and
significance of the research described in
articles. APA is a good model of a
scientific association that uses its
publication and electronic resources to
produce many research-based

publications for practitioners and the
public.
Productive solutions exist for making
the results of science better understood
and appreciated. The NIH public
access policy, however, is not among
them.

9

ISSN:1040-404X

APRIL 2006
SCIENCE DIRECTORATE STAFF

PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE AGENDA

Steven Breckler, Executive Director for Science
Virginia E. Holt, Assistant Executive Director for Science
Geoffrey Mumford, Assistant Executive Director for Science
Stephanie Cox, Outreach and Development Coordinator
Marianne Ernesto, Director, Testing & Assessment
Halah Gordon, Administration Manager
Jeanie Kelleher, Special Programs Associate
Heather Kelly, Senior Legislative & Federal Affairs Officer
Patricia Kobor, Senior Science Policy Analyst
Deborah McCall, Science Programs Manager
Sangeeta Panicker, Director, Research Ethics Office
Clare Porac, Senior Scientist
Sara Robinson, Legislative Assistant
Karen Studwell, Senior Legislative & Federal Affairs Officer
Amy Test, Special Programs Assistant
Kymberly Thornton, Administrative Assistant
Suzanne S. Wandersman, Director, Governance Affairs
Jennifer Webb, Science Programs Associate

Psychological Science Agenda is published monthly by APA’s
Science Directorate. Dedicated to promoting and serving scientific psychology, Psychological Science Agenda provides news about national
scientific policy developments, examines policy issues affecting and affected by the behavioral research community, and highlights the advocacy efforts of the Science Directorate on behalf of research and academic psychologists. Psychological Science Agenda also features news
of APA’s governance and program initiatives relating to scientific and
academic psychology, and provides valuable, timely information about
funding opportunities for research psychologists.
Psychological Science Agenda is distributed free to 30,000 psychologists, members of Congress and their staffs, key officials in federal agencies that fund behavioral research and use its findings, institutional libraries, and science writers in the national media.
To obtain a subscription to Psychological Science Agenda, contact the
Science Directorate at: American Psychological Association, Science
Directorate, 750 First Street, NE, Washington, DC 20002-4242.
Phone: (202) 336-6000 Fax: (202) 336-5953.
TDD: (202) 336-6123. E-mail: science@apa.org.
BOARD OF SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS
Ronald T. Brown, (Chair)

APA SCIENCE DIRECTORATE WEBSITE:
w w w. a p a . o r g / s c i e n c e
Science

Directorate

Email

Address:

science@apa.org

Sandra Graham
Barbara Landau
Hazel R. Markus
Liora P. Schmelkin
Norman E. Spears
Lois Tetrick
John R. Weisz
Alice Young
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR FOR SCIENCE
Steven Breckler
EXECUTIVE EDITOR
Virginia E. Holt

PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE AGENDA WEBSITE:
w w w. a p a . o r g / s c i e n c e / p s a / h o m e p a g e . h t m l
PSA

Email

Address:

psa@apa.org

